preface

It’s certain that beyond passing aptitude tests and interviews, organisations, globally, have turned to giving preferences to Emotional Intelligence (EQ) over intelligence Quotient, It has becomes clear that a new workplace etiquette is emerging. No doubt workplace are coming under compelling influence of Emotional Intelligence like never before.

The man who pioneered the thinking on Emotional Intelligence in his several books, Daniel Goleman, views it as the capacity for recognising our own feelings and those of others, for motivating ourselves and our relationships, it is the ability to accurately identify and understand one’s own emotional reactions and those of others. 

It also includes the ability to regulate one’s emotions and to use them to make good decisions and act effectively. It provides the bedrock for many competencies that are critical for effective  performance in the worlplace and society at large.
Emotional Intelligence is not about being sentimental and nice all the time but about being honest with oneself and others and being aware of one’s feelings, and those of others. it is also about understanding the personal managementand social skills that allow us to succeed in our interactions with other people.
 
Considering its importance, some organisation now have strategies throiugh which they know whether prospective employees possess the emotional competence required for their jobs. This means that companies do not just want to employ people with the right skills and qualifications but poeple who posses the required emotional balance that will enhance performance on the job.

Notwithstanding the disapproval of this assertion by cynics, it is still the view of many experts, that it is not someone who possesses the required certificate that will get the job in the new-millenium workplace but the person who has excellent skills cum the powerful combination of self management skills and ability to relate to others.
They said that the new millenial workplace requires employees, who have strong background, not only in educational knowledge but also in inter-personal skills - such as responsibility, self esteem, sociability, self-management, integrity and honesty. Emotional Intelligence, according to them, is the basis of these qualities.
Other key indicies of Emotional Intelligence that one must posses to be relevant in the present day workplace, according to findings, are team playing and effective collaboration, trust building, ability to handle confrontations constuctively, treating one another in a caring way, seeing one anoither as a collaborators and not competitors, and understanding the sources of individuals’ behaviour as well as taking concrete steps to address problematic behaviours.
Low morale, intimidated workers arrogant bosses, among others, are variations of Emotional Intelligence deficiencies and their effects become evident in decreased productivity, missed deadlines, mistakes, absences, ill health, unecessary transfer request, loss of organisational reputation; lost of key staff and depleted bottomline while many executives have begun to realise that Emotional Intelligence is as critical as Intelligence Quotient, if not more critical, to an individual’s effectiveness, managers have also started appreciating the fact that Emotional Intelligence is linked to organisational effectiveness.

It has now become a Human Resources challenge, as HR managers are faced with the enormous task of helping employees build intelligence. Experts thus argue that building group’s Emotional Intelligence is more important since most work, in the present workplace, gets done in teams. this presupposes that the era of workers staying in their individual cubicles has gone. workplace are now becoming more collaborative and employees now operate the principles of  ‘modus vivendi’, whereby they work together even if they dislike one another. Being effective in such a workplace, no doubt, requires a high level of Emotional Intelligence.

Rafiu Ademola Salau
@salauoba
Nigerian Business Pages
#Dignity Or Adversity















TABLE OF CONTENTS
1	INTRODUCTION OF EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE (EQ)
2	UNDERSTANDING THE CONCEPT OF EQ (DEFINITIONS)
3	WHAT ARE EMOTIONS AND WHAT EFFECTS DO THEY HAVE ON US.
4	EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE: IT’S LINKS TO SUCCESS AND 		PROFITABILITY
5	EMOTIONAL - INTELLIGENCE AT THE WORK PLACE
6	THE BUSINESS CASE FOR EMOTIONAL -INTELLIGENCE
7	The use of Emotional Intelligence
8	Emotional Intelligence in Nigeria 
9	Emotional intelligence in politics.


















CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION OF EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE
The term emotional intelligence first appeared in a 1966 German article entitled “emotional Intelligence and Emancipation”, by Hanscarl leuner! A research psychologist, leuner hypothesized that adult women who reject their social roles do so because of their low emotional intelligence. Though he gave no clear definition or measure of his concept, he theorized that his clients were having difficulties understanding and regulating their own emotions because of their premature separation from their mothers. His treatment for the women in his case studies combined administration of the hallucinogenic drug LSD with psychotheraphy.
A subsequent reference to emotional intelligence appeared in 1985, in an unpublished dissertation by an English doctoral student Wayne Payne. He described emotional intelligence as a type of core intelligence in which; “facts, meanings, truths, relationships etc., are those that exist in the realm of emotion. Thus, feelings are facts,” Payne advocated the cultivation of emotional intelligence in children through the use of theraphy and various school activities. These, he noted, were ideal opportunities to help people learn ways to express their emotions more freely.
But emotional intelligence did not receive widespread attention until the publication of Rutgers University professor Daniel Goleman’s 1995 book Emotional Intelligence, which became a nationwide best sector in America. He has since published numerous articles in Harvard Business Review advising leaders on the importance of his theory and its relevance to their success. Goleman defines emotional intelligence as a unique ability characterized by behaviours that include high motivation or drive, strong impulse control, emphathy for other people, and a hopeful outlook over time, Goleman’s concept of emotional intelligence has had a profound effect on the field of executive - assessment practices. It is hard to final another individual psychologist who has had a broader impact on current executive-evaluation practices. His influence has made it common practice to screen  executives for their emotional intelligence, and virtually all major executive search firms include some measure of his theory in their assessment of candidates. Goleman has, through his highly engaging writing style, hammered away at the All major executive search firms include some measure of his theory in their assessment of candidates. Goleman has, through his highly engaging writing style, hammered away at the notion that verbal and mathematics problem should remain the ultimate measures of intelligence. His call for a reexamination of our school-based definition of intelligence has struck a powerful chord both in business circles and with the general public.

REACTION
Millions of people whose futures had been affected by poor standardise test score welcomed Goleman’s voice for change. Corporate leaders who’d had personal experience with academically brillian individuals who were less than competent leaders embraced Goleman’s concepts, in the hope of finding a better way to identify the star talent they so desperately sought. Goleman deserves credit for vastly increasing the popular understanding of the complexity of human intelligence and forcing us to expand our notion of what it means to be smart.
Yet, rarely has a psychological concept that was so readily accepted and so widely applied to business received such scathing criticism in management-science literature. Mainstream researchers’ central concern is that emotional intelligence has been prematurely declared to predict work performance, without any emperical evidence to support the contention. A review of the research that has been done on this topic reveals these criticisms to be well founded.
To date, despite the efforts of a multitude of credible research scientist, not one published study has shown emotional intelligence to predict performance and beyond what could already be explained by other commonly applied and long established measures.

In 2003, two of the most respected and widely published researchers in emotional intelligence, Yale university professor Peter Salvery and university of California-Irivine professor David Pizarro, wrote an article titles “The value of Emotional Intelligence” in which they summarised the current state of inquiry on this subject.
They pointed out the persistent lack of emperical evidence to show that emotional intelligence can predict work performance, and warned that unsubstantiated assertions about the concept only serve to increase skepticism toward the theory as whole. They also acknowledge that while there is still no established test of these traits for employee screening, emotional intelligence does provide a useful framework for future research into an important but neglected topic.
Why has it been so hard to prove the value of one of the most popular theories of the last decade? The problem is that the behaviours that have been widely cited as indicators of emotional intelligence have long been recognises as personality traits, tending more towards behavioural preferences than actual aptitudes.
In an articles publised in the 2000 editions of Handbook of intelligence, psychology Professors Richard Mayor of University of California- Santa Babara and Peter Salovey of Yale University, and consultant David Cavuso of work-life strategies, warned that emotional control, achievement drive, empathy, and positive outlook (all cited as being part of emotional intelligence) are each included within the most commonly used models of personality. They concluded that assessments based on these characteristics will yeild little information beyond that offered by readily available personality inventories.

Emperical studies have supported their observation. The Emotionl Quotient inventory (EQ-i) developed by Reuven Bar-on, was the first commercially available and comprehensive measure of emotional intelligence. Independent evaluations of the test showed it to be so highly correlated with personality traits such as conscientiousness, sociability, and empathy that reviewers have declared the EQ-i to be simply a measure of these traits, which have been under investigation for decades. What’s more, personality traits and intelligence- although both widely accepted as important psychological phenomena - have never been shown to have much of a relationship with one another. For instance, bright people have all sorts of personalities. Some are highly aggressive and forceful, while others take a more “laid back” attitude. A personality type is in no way indicative of how smart a person is, and when it cp,es to predicting work performance, personality assessments can hardly be considered.

A substitute for cognitive ability tests.
In 1991, University of Iowa Professors Murray Barrick and Michael Mount published the most widely cited study regarding the power of personality to predict work performance and analysed the emperical research on this topic. For  a pool of nearly 24,000 individuals personality attributes explained only 4% (percent) of the variance in employee performance ratings. In comparison, IQ, the most commonly used measure of intelligence, accounted for over 30% (percent), nearly ten times the predictive power of personality. Emotional Intelligence’s reliance upon personality traits as its care will always severely limit as predictive power.
Yet regardless of its limitations, it’s important to recognise why emotional intelligence has gained so much traction in part, it is because of the vaccum created by the absence of an appropriate means for understanding and measuring intelligence among executives. The shift away from traditional academic definitions has allowed the concept of intelligence to be reintroduced without the distateful elements of IQ measures. But the substitution of personality for intelligence has distracted observers from the underniable truth that cognitive ability is one of the most prominent determining factors in executive performance.
Unfortunately, the focus on personality traits as a means for evaluating executives is a problem that has existed in management science for decades. It is an ongoing misconception a terribly misguided one-that personality and style are key indicators of performance.

CHAPTER II
UNDERSTANDING THE CONCEPT OF EQ (DEFINITIONS)
Most early writers of Emotional Intelligence interchange the term “EQ” and “emotional intelligence” EQ is not a numerial test score like IQ. It is simply a convenient way to make distinction between a person’s innate potential versus what actually happens to that potential over their life time.
This innate intelligence can be either developed or damaged with life experiences, particularly by the emotional lessons taught by the parents, teachers, caregivers and family during childhood and adolescence. The impact of these lessons results in what we refer to as one’s level of “EQ”. “EQ represents a relative measure of a person’s healthy or unhealthy development of their innate emotional intelligence. It is possible for a person to start out with high Emotional intelligence, but then be emotionally damaged in early childhood, causing a low EQ later in life. On the other hand, it is possible for a child to start out with relatively low emotional intelligence, but received healthy emotional modelling, nurturing etc, which will result in moderately high EQ. It is much easier to damage a high emotional intelligence child then to develop the EQ of a low emotional intelligence child, this follows the principle that it is generally easier to destroy than create.
In comparison to say, mathematical intelligence, it is important to note that relatively few people start out with high innate mathematical abilities and then have this ability damaged through misleading or false math training or modelling. This is relatively few because in comparison to the number of emotionally sensitive children who receive unhealthy and self destructive emotional imprinting from any number of sources. Parents and television shows don’t generally teach that 2+2 = 96. but they do often teach emotional lessons which are as equivalent in unhealthiness as this equation is inaccuracy.
At present, all models of emotional intelligence, including even the most “pure” of the group, the mayo/salovey/caruso model, combine the measurement of the innate emotional variables (sensitivity, memory, processing and learning) with the environmental affects on those same variables.
Hein Definition of Emotional Intelligence S Hein define EQ as follows:
“Emotional Intelligence as the innate potential to feel, use, communicate, recognise, remember, describe, identify, learn from, manage, understand and explain emotions” - Hein 2007.
Hein explain further with the believe that each baby is born with a certain unique potential for emotional sensitivity. Emotional memory, emotional processing and emotional learning ability. It is these four inborn components which Hein believe form the core of one’s emotional intelligence. He also believe that it is important to make a distinction, a person’s innate potential versus what actually happens to that potential over their lifetime.
In his December 15 2007, note - he said “Today I realised that the ability to explain your feelings is also a part of emotional intelligence. As with the other components of emotional intelligence, one’s ability to do this later in life depends both on one’s innate potential and one’s life experiences. Here is one example, if we ask a person how they feel and the tell us they feel uncomfortable with something, but they cannot tell us why, it could be more because they lack innate emotional intelligence or because they were never aught to understand their feelings, to label their feelings and to analyse the cause and effect relationship between events and their feelings.
As a practical example of emotional intelligence, and to see how even one baby’s innate level of emotional can be different than another’s, let’s look at a baby’s feelings of fear.
Fear, of course, is a natural feeling. Its purpose, as designed by nature, is to help the baby survive. A baby has a natural fear of abandonement because the baby knows its life depends on others. When it is left alone, it feels afraid. A baby is also afraid of being separated from its parents, so if a stranger tries to take the baby away from them, it is natural for the baby to feel afraid. But not all babies respond to fear in the exactly the same way.
The Mayer - Salovey Definition of Emotional intelligence.
Jack Mayer and Peter Salovey have been he leading researchers on emotional intelligence since 1990 in United States of America. In 1990 they suggested that emotional intelligence is a true form of intelligence which had not been scientifically measured until they began their research work. They define emotional intelligence as follows:
Emotional intelligence as the subset of a social intelligence that involves the ability to monitor one’s own and other’s feelings and emotions, to discriminate among them and use this information to guide one’s thinking and actions - 1990.
In the abstract of the 1990 articles they wrote that;
“This articles presents a framework for emotional intelligence, a set of skills hypothesised to contribute to the accurate appraisal and expression of emotions in oneself and in others, the effective regulation of emotions in self and others, and the use of feelings to motivate, plan and achieve in one’s life”.
They and their colleague have use various definitions of emotional intelligence in their academic journal, articles since 1990, but their 1997 definition is the one that they use the most now, first, here are few other definitions they have used, then a fuel presentation for the 1997 definition is shwon. Please be sure to also note the words ability, skill and potential in this articles. The article discusses a fundamental problem with this 1997 definition ie the problem with their imprecise use of the word “ability”
The four branches of Emotional  Intelligence. The first, Emotional Perception, involves such abilities as identifying emotions in faces. J music and stories.
The second, Emotional facilitation of thought, involves such abilities as relating emotions to other mental sensations such as taste and colour (relations that might be employed in artwork) and using emotion in reasoning and problem solving (Also “integrating emotions in thought” Mayer and Cobb).

The third, Emotional understanding involves solving emotional problems such as knowing which emotions are similar, or opposite, and what relations they convey.
The fourth, Emotional management involves understanding the implications of social act on emotions and the regulation of emotion in self and others.
Thus Emotional Intelligence is the “ability to process emotional information particularly as it involves the perception, assimilation, understanding and management of emotions OR “the ability to accurately identify emotions use emotions to help you think, understand what causes emotions and manage to stay open to these emotions in order to capture the wisdom of our feelings”.

The 1997 Mayer Salovey definition. This was the first time Mayer and Salovey detailed their “four branch model” of emotional Intelligence. They definition is extremely through and deserves close attention. They introduce the model by saying that the four branches in their chart are;
“arranged from more basic psychological processes to higher, more psychologically integrated process. For example, the lowest level branch concerns the (relatively) single abilities of perceiving and expressing emotion. In contrast, the highest level branch concerns the conscious, reflective regulation of emotion.
They admit that abilites that emerge relatively early in development are to the left of a given branch; later developing abilities are to the right” And they also say that, “people high in emotional intelligence are expected to progress more quickly through the abilities designated and to master more of them”.
The 1997 Mayer Salovey four branches of Emotional Intelligence. 
(1)	Perception Appraisal and Expression of Emotion
(2)	Emotional Facilitation of thinking
(3)	Understanding and Analysing Emotions; employing Emotional knowledge
(4)	Reflective Regulation of Emotions to promote Emotional and Intellectual 		Growth.


(1)perception, Appraisal and Expression of Emotions
*	Ability to identify in one’s physical states, feelings and thoughts 
*	Ability to identify emotions in other people, designs, artwork etc 			through language, sound, appearance and behaviour
*	Ability to express emotions accurately and to express needs related to 			those feelings.
2	Emotional Facilitation of Thinking
*	Emotions prioritise thinking by directing attention to important 	information.
*	Emotions are sufficiently vivid and available that they can be generated 	as aids to judgement and memory concerning feelings.
*	Emotional mood swings change the individual’s perspective from 	optimistic to pessimistic, encouraging consideration of multiple points 	of view.
3	Understanding and Analysing Emotions: Employing Emotional 	Knowledge 
*	Ability to label emotions and recognize   relations among the words and 	the emotions themselves, such as the relation be liking and loving.
*	Ability to interpret the meaning that emotions convey regarding 	relationship such as that sadness often accompanies a loss.
*	Ability to understand complex feelings, simultaneous feelings of love 	another or blends such as awe as a combination of fear and surprise. 
 
4	Reflective Regularization of emotions  to promote emotional and 	intellectual growth
*	Ability to stay open to feelings both to those that are pleasant and to 	those that are unpleasant.
*	Ability to reflectively engage or detach from an emotion depending 	upon its judged informativeness or utility. 
*	Ability to reflectively monitor emotions in relations to oneself and 	others such as recognizing how clear, typical influential or reasonable 	they are.
Other definition of Emotional intelligence 
“Emotional intelligence is being able to recognize name and appropriately deal with emotions that we fell and experience. We may all feel anger, emotional intelligence is knowing what to do with the emotion of anger to achieve the best possible outcome  Lea Brovedani.
“Emotional intelligence is an array of non cognitive capabilities, competencies, and skills that influence one’s ability to succeed in coping with environmental demands and pressures” Revven Baron.
“Emotional intelligence is the set of abilities that we like to think of as being on the other  side of the report card from the academic skills”  Maurice Elias.
“The ability to sense and use emotions to more effectively  manage ourselves and influence positive outcomes in our relationships with others”
Institute of Emotional Intelligence Living.
“Emotional Intelligence refers to the ability to regulate your impulses,face obstacles and emphasize with others.
A Management Consulting Firm in Australia
“Emotional intelligence is the ability to acquire and apply the knowledge from your emotions and the emotions from others. You can use the information about what you’re feeling to help you make effective decisions about to say or do (or not say or do) next”    Bryon Stock
Finally in 1997 a team of researchers know as six seconds sought to take those best practices and create a framework for teaching and practicing the skills of EQ. They went beyond the scientific definition to capture the practical value of the concepts that are worth teaching and learning. Their definition of Emotional Intelligence is “The capacities to create optimal results in your relationship[s with yourself and others”.

Controlling Your Emotions
Question: What is stopping you from meditating everyday?
Reflection: Imagine you are able to choose what you feel at all times what choices would you make… when and where?
Action: how will you begin with what feeling and where? 
Reading the Emotions of Others
Question: why do you think we find it hard to empathise and easily fall into the emotional state of the other?
Reflection: Imagine helping a colleague at work tomorrow through an emotional crisis- what do your thoughts look like, what feelings do you have, what are you doing.
Action: Identify the two emotions that you felt today and what can you do to ensure they do not arise, at least as powerfully, tomorrow? What moves you
        
















CHAPTER THREE
What are emotions and what effects do they have on us
This is difficult territory for most of us to explore simply because there is so much confusion surrounding what we mean by emotion. To the average psychologist, emotion is a healthy energy or state and a natural expression of the self. But to someone with an understanding that has it roots in authentic spirituality emotion is always an unhealthy sign. Emotion can be seen as the price we pay today, for making the mistake of attachment yesterday. The rest of us are much confused an find it almost impossible to clearly define emotion let alone fully understand the source and effects of this energy. And yet, in the context of our relationships, emotions forms a large part of the energy that we will exchange with others almost everyday.

Before we can venture further into the land of emotions and feelings we need a definition. Try this “Emotions is the disturbance of the energy of your consciousness when the object of attachment is either damaged, threatened or moved sorry it’s  a bit long- it’s both a definition and a description. A shorter definition appears in the dictionary as “agitation of mind” It’s quite simple really. If someone walks up to your car with a coin in their hand and scratches your car down the side, what do you feel? Anger would be most peoples response. Anger is a form of suffering, it is pain at an emotional level, it is a disturbance of your consciousness. And it is self created. Why? Because you are attached to the car. You are not only attached to the car you are identified with the car. If I scratch your car and you feel pain you are basically telling me that you think you are a car! You are utterly confused about who you are, but you are not aware of your confusion because you are lost in your own emotional disturbance. How can this be? The car is in two places at once, out on the street and on the screen of your mind. If you explore any emotional experience you will find that it happens because you are attached and identified with what is on your mind. If you did not attach to the car that is on your mind, there would be no disturbance. This applies to all the things that we learn to get attached to including houses, people, money, places etc. Unless you see this and unless you accept responsibility for all your emotional disturbances, unless you learn to change your relationship with all the things you have learned to get attached to, you can completely forget emotional intelligence. You will be too disturbed  too often to ever cultivate such an intelligence properly. The basis of emotional intelligence is seeing exactly why you create this inner disturbance and accepting full responsibility for it. 
Most people learn to create the following forms of suffering of disturbances within their consciousness. Anxiety, tension, fear, terror, irritation, frustration, anger, rage, sadness, melancholy, depression, worry, powerlessness, hopelessness are but a few of the many painful emotional insperiences ! if you take a moment to look and see the root cause of each one you will see it is because of some form of attachment or misidentification which takes place in your own mind. Each week hundreds of thousands of fully grown mature men will spend 90 minutes disturbing themselves as they watch their team at play! One minute the high of excitement and the next moment the depths of despair. We have been taught to believe this is good, normal and healthy, but it is not- it leads only to addiction to the stimulation of the minds and the chemicals they stimulate in our bodies it also blinds us to the truth that we ourselves create every single emotion that we experience. Instead we belief that the other people and events are responsible for our emotional states. Think that without emotional life would be without feeling and meaning, a cold and isolated existence. In fact the opposite is true . free of emotional disturbance we are able to feel more and better, care deeper and better. We also re-learn how to motivate ourselves instead of being dependent on external events to stimulate motivation within us. 
Neither love or happiness are disturbances or agitations so they are not emotions according to our definitions here. They can be seen as core states of the self from the human heart when the heart is free, clean and clear I.e when it is not attached to anyone or anything lave takes many forms, from caring to comforting, from empathy to compassion, from acceptance to appreciation. As does happiness, whose deepest form is contentment. The ability to express and feel those forms of love and happiness is totally diminished by any emotional disturbance. Unfortunately we are somewhat confused as once again we have been taught to mistake sadness for love, excitement for happiness, worry for care and fear for respect. The process unconfusing ourselves and understanding ‘the what’ and ‘the why’ of our emotions requires time spent in practices such as meditation and self-reflection. Exploring the territory of feelings and emotions is not  group activity. It cannot be understood through the words of others, only in the experience of one-self. Here are some reflective questions to encourage your exploration and understanding.
Feeling is something you do, not something that happens to you. Unfortunately we have been taught to believe feelings happens to us. It starts young when we see our first circus or similarity thrilling event. It is there that we learn two
Fatal lessons. First, to believe that excitement (stimulation) equals happiness, and therefore happiness comes from excitement, which it doesn’t, and second, that our feelings in life must always come from outside ourselves. It’s down hill all the way from there! The dictionary defines feeling as ‘perception by touch’. we can feel at three levels. We can perceive and touch at three levels- physical, mental,spiritual. At the physical level you feel the texture and quality of what you are wearing now. This is perception by touching or feeling using your senses. At the mental level you are using your mind and intellect to feel the quality of these ideas and concepts. This is completely internal and invisible as you allow them into your consciousness. At the spiritual level we are able to feel the energies around and within us. We are able to pick up the vibrations of another and perceive/feel their state. The deepest spiritual feeling is to stop what we are doing right now, take our attention inwards, and in one second feel our own inner peace. All these forms of feeling we can master, and if we do, we will free ourselves from all forms of emotional disturbance. And if the remnant of old emotions are triggered you will simply say ‘I feel angry’ as you perceive and touch the presence of anger within. But the moment we move into a state of detach observation of our anger it will begin to die. All emotions dies under observation, and observation has already begun when we say ‘I feel angry’ 
There are five essential steps to emotional control and mastery. Although the complete process will eventually happen in seconds in real time, it is essential for our process of learning to break it down and see what is required at every step. 
step one- Awareness 
This simply means being aware of the emergence of the subtlest of emotions which, if left unchecked will grow into significant disturbances. For example irritation leads to frustration, leads to anger, leads to rage.
Step two- Acknowledge
This simply means taking responsibility for the emotion by understanding and acknowledging that I am the creator of the emotion, not someone of something else.
Step three- Acceptance 
Fully accept the presence of the emotion without resisting it in any way. If it is resisted it simply becomes stronger, or it is suppressed for another day.
Step four- Ascend 
This is the moment of full detachment from both the emotion and the inner source of emotion. In the process of detached observation the emotion is losing its power. And it is only through detached observation that the emotion will begin to dissipate and eventually dissolve 
Step five- Attune 
This means returning our attention to the very centre of ourselves where our inner peace and power are to be found. This is the purpose of mediation. The ability to pick up others emotion is something we can all do naturally. Some of us learn to do it with ease when we are young, usually at our mother or father’s knee. Others have experiences in childhood which made them shut down this capacity and shut out another’s feelings, either way, here we are now, and it’s only in the now that we can learn. The fastest way to learn to be sensitive to and identify others emotional states is to learn to read our own.
If we cannot inwardly read and identify our own emotions it will be impossible to do this for others. This is an ongoing process of self- awareness and self- realization not to the point of self obsession, but with a deliberate purpose focused by the question, ‘what am I feeling right now’? this process gradually increases our capacity to emphatise. The great danger of getting too close to others emotions is that we fall into them and create the same emotions ourselves. This is often seen as one of the pillars of friendship in an emotional relationship. But to fall  into and create and experience the same emotions as another is not empathy, and it doesn’t help them climb out of their disturbance. Hence the need to practice ‘detached involvement’ a process whereby we sufficiently detached to be able to accurately read and understand the emotions of another while staying sufficiently involved with them so we may offer our help to them. The use of questions helps them become aware and gradually detached from their own emotional disturbance, and thereby pull themselves out. This is empathy in action. Sometimes it’s called therapy! 
The Latin root of ‘emotion’ is motus anima which means the spirit that moves us, or energy that moves us. That energy, that spirit, is the self. We move ourselves. However, if we motivate ourselves, or allow anything outside ourselves to motivate us then we are masters of our own life, we will not be be the authors of our own destiny. If we are the master of our thoughts and feelings then we are the primary movers of ourselves and everything in our life. To ask what motivates you is to ask what moves you, which is to ask what does the self use to motivate or move the self. Most of us have learned to be motivated by extrinsic or external factors while a few discovered that the deepest motivators are intrinsic. We can consciously use our values to motivate us. We can use our thoughts to motivate us, and we can even use memories of yesterday to motivate us today. However the deepest motivator for any human being is a clear sense of meaning and purpose. This can only arise when we know who we are, where we are and what we have at the deepest level. This is where emotional intelligence flows into spiritual intelligence. Spiritual intelligence is based on a true sense of self as spirit not form, as soul not body. Only in this state of self awareness are we able to discern the true meaning of things/events/circumstances and only then are we able to see our purpose.  
Defining Emotions:
Question: In relation to what do you become emotionally disturbed and why? (If this question is tough read chapter…. again)
Reflection: How would you feel and what would you do if you were not attached to anything,
Action: What will you do tomorrow to free yourself from your self- created emotional 

Naming Emotions
Question: What are the emotions mentioned as extremely unhealthy? What others could you add?
Reflection: Imagine watching a sporting event without emotions, how do you feel, what do you feel, what are you doing internally instead of using the external events to disturb yourself?
Action: Where and when can you practice this detached observation in real time?
So what is love & what is happiness 
Question: Remember the last time you were emotional about someone- what were the thoughts and beliefs behind the emotion? What were you attached to?
Reflection: When have you seen someone to be at their most loving, was it when they were emotional or when they were calm and focused?
Action: Why would you think true love is not emotional? (Even if you still believe it is imagine for a moment It is not)
So what are feelings
Question: What is the difference between emotion and a feeling?
Reflection: Why do you find it so difficult to choose your feelings?
Action: What could you do tomorrow that will strengthen your ability to choose to be the master of your feelings?


CHAPTER IV
Emotional Intelligence 
It’s links to success and profitability. Whether it’s in the boardroom or the classroom individual need the skills to communicate, work, work in teams, and let go of the   personal and family issues that get in the way of working and learning. Such skills add up to what is known as emotional intelligence, and they are even more important as educators realise that these skills are critical to academic achievement.
Emotional intelligent individuals stand out. Their ability to empathise, persevere, control impulses, communicate clearly, make thoughtful decisions, solve complex problems easily and work with others earns them friends and success. They tend to 
live happier lives with more satisfying relationships. At work, they are more productive and they spur productivity in others. At school, they do better on standardise subjects and help create a safe, comfortable classroom atmosphere that facilitate learning.
Psychologist and author Daniel Goleman popularized the term “emotional intelligence” in his landmark 1995 best- selling book of the same. What emotional intelligence is says Goleman, “is the capacity for recognizing our own feelings and those of others, for motivating ourselves, and for managing emotions well in ourselves and in our relationships” or as Maurice Elias, Rutgers university psychology professor out it “it is the set of abilities that help us get along with other people in all kinds of life situations. He calls it the missing piece” in America Education 
Self- Awareness and Empathy 
Jonathan Cohen, President of the center for social Emotional Education in New York, argues that EQ like self- awareness and empathy plays a huge role in every aspect of life “we all know that how we feel about ourselves and others can professionally affect our concentration to remember, to think, and to experience ourselves” he says kids without emotional intelligence don’t follow directions, continually go off- task, lacks attention and have difficulty working cooperatively on social and emotional learning. The increasingly term for emotional intelligence instruction. Can become lesson on the hurtfulness of put- downs followed by discussion on ways to 
communicate “put op” It can be a regular morning feelings as the pain of their pet dying or the joy of a family out can be an analysis of a conflict in great literature and a discussion about different paths the characters mus have taken. It can be a common plan to take a think, rather than react automatically, and often aggressively, to distress. It districtrise commitment to community service. It can be a software programme where students get  a clearer ideas of their reactions to risky situations.   
Miraculous Transformations. 
Many educators say they are gratified by the results of such instruction in their schools because of is effect on both the schools environment and academics. Fifth- grade teacher Grace Wiesner calls the transformation in the Waldport, Oregon, classroom “miraculous”. 
“Distruptions due to acting out, arguing or talking back have been significantly reduced” she says. Tina Valentine, a fourth- grade teacher at Kensington Avenue School in springfield, Massachuseuts, agrees “I find I’m not spending as much time with behavioural management issues, so  I actually have more time to spend with academics. “A number of studies also have found a correction between social skills and academic achievement.
Instruction in emotional intelligence is not a quick fix or a one- time lesson. The programmes, say Elias “take no less than three years” to get to a place where teachers are comfortable and students are showing the benefits, Cohen adds that while growing number of school programmes include elements of instruction aimed at emotional needs, too many of those programmes are fragmented, short - term, and well- integrated into the regular curriculum or school structure. “Just as we do to expect kids to learn a language in a year, we don’t expect kids to learn social emotional skills in one year’ he says. 


Skills more than values 
Parents need not fear that emotional intelligence translates to a set of values may be affected with religion. “we’re not really teaching values. We’re actually teaching skills “says Linda Lantieri co- founder of the resolving conflict creative program, one of the longest- running conflict resolution and social and emotional learning programmes. “ther’re almost like tools in a tool book. I remember one parent place of worship, I teach my kid to be honest, and you gave the child the skills to be that way” The character education movement which promotes universal values like respect, honesty, justice, and compassionate also closely aligned to social emotional learning. 
Social and emotional learning programmes work best when parents and teachers are partners, and that means schools need to train both parents and teachers in order to promote behaviour that improves communication, empathy, self- awareness, educators, policy makers, and businesses all have a role to play in supporting the social and emotional learning of school children “we’re talking about a whole new vision of education that says  that educating the heart is as important as educating the mind” says Lantieri. Rutgers Elias put it in another way. He says that parents don’t just want smart kids. They want kids who are also responsible, non- violent, and caring. We want the whole package. 














CHAPTER V
Emotional Intelligence at the Workplace
Emotional Intelligence EQ has been recently validated in United State with about 25 major skill areas that can influence your career and create abilities that improve your worth at work. These EQ skills are not ready measured on standard intelligence or expertise tests. Infact, EQ is quite different from IQ. People with emotional have tremendous advantage that far outweigh highly intelligent people who may be moody, premadonnas or have temper tantrums.
These “emotional intelligence” skills can count for far more when it comes to being a “star performer” or excelling at just about any job. To be outstanding, these EI skills are nearly everything for reaching success and the top of any career ladder.
In the USA today article, “working smart” author Dr. Daniel Goleman stresses that emotional intelligence is not just being “nice” or giving free rein to feelings so that it “all hangs out”. Instead, successful people use their EQ to manage feelings both appropriately and effectively so that the common good and goal of the work group can be readily achieved.
Each person has a profile of emotional strong and weak point areas. For example a generality and on the average statement can be made that women are more aware of their emotions, are emphatic and are adopt interpersonally. On the average, men appear more self- confident, optimistic, adapt easily, and handle stress better. Goleman reports that there are far more similarities  than differences between woman and men and there are five major categories with five
Components each that complete the EQ profile.
In order for Nigerians to know their emotional intelligence, we need to understand these 25 abilities that matter the most.
The five major categories include:
Self awareness, self-Regulation, motivation, Empathy and social skills. all aspect of work. Some of them are: accurate self-assessment, self-confidence, self-control, conscientiousness, adaptability innovation, commitment, initiative, political awareness, optimism, understanding others, conflict management skills, team capabilities, communication and the ability to initiate or manage change.
Dr Goleman article cites example of how important EQ is to industry leaders, flight attendants, physiciary managers,and computer programmers. It appears to be especially important for computer programmers who can make a competitive difference with emotional intelligence abilities that help a person to collaborate, (not complete against a team), stay late to help the team members, and share shortcuts to achieving answers. The output of the surveyed top programmers in the USA showed a 1,272 percent more than the average production return. This shows the extent at which EQ affects output.
The good news for everyone is that unlike IQ which does not change much after fourteen years, the level of our emotional intelligence can continue to grow, develop and change as it is largely a learned area of expertise. This growths is referred to by Dr Goleman by its old fashioned word “Maturity”.
Dr. Goleman offers twelve questions to ask yourself to see if you work with emotional intelligence. If you answer “yes” to half or more, (and if other people who know you agree with your self-rating) then you are doing okay with your EQ.
Let see where you score on those items taken from Dr Goleman emotional Intelligence chart.
Do you-can you-Are you:
-    understand both your strengths and weaknesses?
-    be depended on to take care of every detail?
-    do you hate to let things slide?
-    comfortable with change and open to novel ideas?
-    motivated by the satisfaction of meeting your own standards of excellence.
-    stay optimistic when things go wrong?
-    see things from another person’s point of view and sense what matters most to 	that person?
-    let customers’ needs determine how you serve them?
-    enjoy helping co-workers develop their skills?
-    read office politics accurately?
-    able to find “win-win” solutions in negotiating and conflicts
-    the kind of person other people want on a team?
-    enjoy collaborating with others
-    usually persuasive.
You will now add the number of questions to which you could answer yes. How did you score? Answering yes to six or more of the EQ skill items indicate that you are working well and with maturity in the workplace. Do you have more than five questions to which you answered no? Do people who know you well agree with your high number of negative scores? If so, what can you do to change and improve your emotional intelligence score?
In businesses and workplaces of every kind, a great deal of time has to be spent in meetings. To be effective and productive, these meetings must be carefully planned, skillfully led, and the emotional intelligence of the participants can affect the outcome. What are some things that you need to do as the moderator of the meeting to get all participants to share information and contribute to good decision-making? Remember that the key can be understanding others, political awareness of the emotional currents and power relationships, leveraging diversity, developing others and bolstering their abilities as suggested y Goleman.
Another area in which empathy has a play is being a good listener. If you know your emotional intelligence “quotient” EQ needs improvement in your listening ability and that you need to improve your listening habits, what are some of the things you can do to become a “mature” EQ listener? What distinguishes good listeners from the bad ones that you may know or have to deal with each day at work?
In the future, employers are going to require emotional intelligence from their workers, especially as these skills become more critical in a global, diverse workplace. Employees will have to participate in team  building and use collaborative, emotional intelligence skills that enhance working on shared goals. To get you started in a new emotional intelligence direction, the key is to change what may be just a bad habit. There are proven techniques that really work to modify behaviour, which ultimately can change the outcome of your future at both work and home.
Dr Robert Epstein of the United States International University at San Diego, author of “change your Bad Habits to Good” studied more than 2000 years of self-change concepts and came up with three good methods to successfully effect change. “people who have successfully changed their eating habits or career path often relied on these methods” according to Epstein. He calls them the “The three M’s. They are modify your environment, monitor your behaviour and make commitments. People, who change their self, change their world, or “stimulus environment”. if you become more aware of what you are doing wrong - let’s say an annoying bad habit - and start self-monitoring yourself, you can start self-monitoring yourself, you can start to perform positively. Just writing down on a piece of paper each time you misbehave or mis-speak can make you focus on changing behaviour. Another powerful aid to developing those EQ skill areas that you may want to reinforce is to make commitment to another person, who in turn, will put pressure on you when you don’t comply with the area in need of improvement. The really happy news with emotional intelligence maturity building is that we can meet and master improvement in EQ with skills, techniques not just will power .
If you are intrigue by the idea that we can change and enhance our emotional intelligence especially here in Nigeria ans increase our capability for job output, earnings, security and sales, now you can start researching on working with emotional intelligence.
Workplace expertise is more than the ability to technically operates equipment, especially as we move toward a knowledge intensive economy and a service industry economy. 
Areas that can be look into through research on EQ in Nigeria are:
-    what is going wrong when a person is unable to respond effectively to a problem.
-    if someone is interested in their ability to guide their emotional responses to those events that happen in their life so that they can act upon their emotions in an effective manner - research can be instituted.
‘Emotional Intelligence more critical then IQ at workplace’
The chief executive officer MacTay Consulting , Mr. Tayo Rotimi in an interview with punch correspondence in Lagos, said beyond passing aptitude tests and interview, organisations, globally, have turned to giving preference to emotional intelligence over intelligence quotient. Considering recent trends, experiences of candidates, and the fact that such a submission was coming from a leading human resource icon of his standing it becomes clear that a new workplace etiquette is emerging.
No doubt, workplaces are coming under the compelling influence of emotional intelligence like never before.
The man who pioneed the thinking on emotional intelligence in his several books, Daniel Goleman, views it as the capacity for recognising our own feelings and those of others, for motivating ourselves and for managing emotions well in ourselves and our relationships.
A professor of Industrial Relations, university of Lagos, Professor Sola Fajana, in a human resource forum, said “it is the ability to accurately identify and understand one’s own emotional reactions and those of others. It also includes the ability to regulate one’s emotions and to use them to make good decisions and act effectively. It provides the bedrock for many competencies that are critical for effective performance in the workplace. However, the HR Director, Guiness Nigeria PLC (2008), Mrs Ifeoma Mafeni, says “Emotional Intelligence is not about being sentimental and nice all the time but about being honest with oneself and others and being aware of one’s feelings, and those of others. It is also about understanding the personal management and social skills that allow us to succeed in our interactions with other people.
Considering its importance, Rotimi notes that some organizations now have strategies through which they know whether prospective employees possess the emotional intelligence required for their jobs. This means that companies do not just want to employ people with the right skills and qualifications but people who possess the required emotional balance that will enhance performance on the job.
Notwithstanding the disapproval of this assertion by cynics, it is still the view of many experts, which explain why Rotimi did not mince word while stating the global direction on the issue. This perhaps stems from his experience as the former chairman of the Executive Board, International Federation of Training and Development organisations. Experts agree that it is not someone who possesses the required certificates that will get the job in the new-millennium workplace but the person who has excellent skills cum the powerful combination of self management skills and ability to relate to others. They say that the new-millennial workplace requires employees, who have strong background, not only in educational knowledge but also in interpersonal skills such as responsibility, self management, integrity and honesty.  Emotional intelligence, according to them, is the basis of these qualities. Other key indices of emotional intelligence that one must posses to be relevant in the present day workplace, according to findings, are team playing and effective collaboration, trust building, ability to handle confrontations constructively, treating one another in a caring way, seeing one another as collaborators and not competitors, and understanding the sources of individuals behaviour as well as taking concrete steps to address problematic behaviours.
Low morale, intimidated workers, arrogant bosses, among others, are variations of emotional deficiencies and their effects become evident in decreased productivity, missed deadlines, mistakes, absences, ill health, unnecessary transfer requests, loss of organisational reputation, lost of key staff and depleted bottom-line. While many executives have begun  to  realise that emotional intelligence is as critical as intelligence quotient, if not more critical, to an individual’s effectiveness, managers have also started appreciating the fact that emotional intelligence is linked to organisational effectiveness.
It has now become a serious human resource challenge, as HR managers are faced with the enormous task of helping employees build intelligence quotient. Expert thus argue that building group emotional intelligence as more important since most works, in the present workplace gets done in  teams. This presupposes that the era of workers staffing in their individual cubicles has gone. Workplace are now becoming more collaborative and employees now operate the principles of modus riverdi; whereby they work together even if they dislike one another. Being effective is such aw workplace no doubt, requires a high level of emotional competence. Experts note that when team leaders succeed of inculcative, strong emotional intelligence in their team members, the result will be greater collaboration, creativity and productivity. They also say strong group emotional quotient will help the team to consistently produce best results under intense deadline and pressures.
Management consultants Dr Vanessa  Druskat and Mr Steven Wolff, in  their article entitled Building Emotional Intelligence.  of Groups, say, “A group’s emotional intelligence is not simply the sum of its members”. instead, it comes from  norms that awareness and regulation of emotions within and outside the team. These norms build trust, group identity and a sense of group efficacy. Members feel that they work better together than individually. Group emotional intelligence norms build the foundation for true collaboration and co-operation helping otherwise skilled teams fulfill their highest potential”. They also note that to build a foundation for emotional intelligence, a group must be aware of and constructively regulate the emotions of the individual team members, the whole group and other key groups with whom it interacts.
Experts say emotional intelligence is lacking in many organisations. As such, many managers are finding it rather difficult to deal with employees that are becoming increasingly difficult to predict.
According to them, it is not uncommon to see managers, who are technically brilliant but unable to handle stress, or manage feelings of success or failure.
They also say emotional intelligent managers will be able to recognise negative dysfunctional emotions when they occur and be able to replace them with positive and functional useful ones. Thereby, turning sadness to happiness, anxiety to acceptance and fear to comfort. Experts also note that when an organisation is lucky enough to have a high level emotions intelligence such a company would experience improved communication, less workplace conflict, better problem solving skills, better work environment, happier and committed employees happier and more loyal clients/customers, and a stronger bottom-line.
Fajana says, “no matter the volume of motivational energy in the leader, emotional intelligence capacity is what drives enduring effectiveness in any field and in any place.
Finally, Recognising, understanding and managing emotions at work is critical to leading effectively.
Leaders can use this to showcase (our emotions impact our work lives, though practical advice for managing difficult people and situations and device for ........... and their workers ,happiness, Resilience, mindfulness and Empathy.









CHAPTER SIX (VI)

THE BUSINESS CASE FOR EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE
Emotional intelligence EQ which in short can be described as the ability to use emotions effectively since its inception in the American policy in 1990 through research has attracted innovative organizations that have begun testing how to integrate EQ into training and hiring to gain competitive advantage. It is becoming increasingly clear that these skills are the foundation of high- performing organizations. A range of implementation strategic have been used, primarily in selection and training. While the competencies are learnable, best. Practices are just beginning to emerge. Some of the EQ applications in business that have increased revenues are
Increased sales performance through recruiting and training more emotionally intelligent sales people
Improved customer service through recruiting higher EQ customer service representatives
Superior leadership performance by developing and recruiting for executive EQ
Companies in America have demonstrated that using EQ in training and organizational climate change can reduce costs associated with turnover, absenteeism and low performance. 

Research has provided clear evidence that emotional intelligent leaders are more successful Dr. Daniel Goleman, estimated that 90% of the difference between a “good leader” and an “excellent leader” can be attributed to EQ. At Pepsi Co, for example, executives selected for EQ competencies far outperformed their colleagues organization that have a climate where employees feel a strong sense of relationship (I.e are emotionally engaged) have significantly higher profitability, and emotional intelligence appears key to this competitive advantage. The emotional intelligence in business is emerging as a critical factor for sustaining high performance. World- leading organizations, including the US Air Force, American Express, 3M, and Motorola, are adopting EQ practices in their way of doing business. Increasingly, businesses are turning to EQ seeking a systematic solution to critical challenges in states, customer loyalty, retention, productivity, and leadership.

What’s driving this interest? Is emotional intelligence “just a gimmick  or does the science offer new insight and tools that genuinely affect performance and if EQ is so important, how do leaders find their way to the value amidst the hype? 

The Havard Business Review, one of the most prestigious sources of business - best practice, has released several articles pn emotional intelligence. Their 1997 article by Daniel Goleman ranks as their most requested article ever. This popularity led the HBR to re-examine the data on emotional again in 2003. 
Their conclusion
“In hard times, the soft stuff often goes away. But emotional intelligence, it turns out, isn’t so soft. If emotional obliviousness Jeopardises your ability to perform, fend off aggressors, or be compassionate in a crisis, no amount of attention to the bottom line will protect your career. Emotional intelligence isn’t a luxury you can dispense with in tough times. It’s a basic tool that, deployed with finesse, is the key to professional success”.
Your organization is made of people, processes, and property. For a long time, “common wisdom” has been that returns come from investing in the latter two. Yet, in the last decades, a flood of research has challenged that assumption and is increasingly proving that a company’s people are the differentiating factor, since emotional intelligence is all about “people smarts”… about relating to yourself and others… it’s no surprise that EQ play a major role in this dimension.

While researchers once said emotions are in the way of thinking, in the last decades they’ve found that emotions are the key to thinking. EQ researchers are identifying.
The way emotions and thinking interact to create our awareness and decision- making.
How emotions are essential to successful human interaction 
What processes are involved in learning to use and manage emotions more effectively.
The research is beginning to demonstrate what many writers, consultants and other observers has long recognized that the most successful people were not necessarily  those with high IQs but rather those with highly developed interpersonal and social skills.
Peter Salovey, dean and professor of psychology at Yale University and Jack Mayor, a professor at the University of New Hampshire both published the first academic definition of emotional intelligence, in 1990, and have continued as the leading researchers in the field.
Revven Baron, a psychologist and researchers at University of Texas medical Branch, is another pioneer in the field. He created the first validated measure of “emotionally intelligence behaviour” the EQ most psychologists and academic researchers now agree EQ is an intelligence that Is separate from cognitive intelligence (IQ) and has components that are different from traditional measures of personality. Now there are several statistically reliable measures of emotional intelligence and emotional competence, and these measures are being used to demonstrate the links between emotional intelligence and performance. The challenge is to see the value of emotional intelligence, them to begin using these skills on a daily basis. Everyone has emotional intelligence for most of us, it’s an underdeveloped area and an untapped resource. Peter Salovey said, “yes we can control emotions. The trick is doing it in the right way at the right time”It’s not a new idea. Around 350 BC, Aristotle wrote, “anyone can become angry… that is easy but to be angry with the right perso, to the right degree, at the right time, for the right purpose, and in the, right way- that is not easy” Emotional Intelligence remains an emerging science. These research progress in America and Europe in the last 15 years is remarkable but research into other intelligence has been underway for over 100 years. Meanwhile, hundred of consultants, practitioner, authors, and millions of people, are utilizing the new findings to gain a better understanding of themselves and others and to improve performance in leadership, recruitment, retention, sales and team work in a range of organizations.

Whatever kind of organizations you run, a primary measure of success will be the way your customer perceive you. Your organizations ability to attract and retain customers requires far more than customers satisfaction.

Emotional intelligence is at the core of relationships, and sales maxim is that “relationships are everything” just how  much do relationship factors affect sales and the customer’s new of your organization? And what internal skills do your people need to create customer delight?
In a research in America, the forum corporation on manufacturing and service companies conducted extensive studies asking why customers left vendor 30% of the reasons related to product quality and technical excellence. 70% related to emotional and relationship factors. If you think about your own vendors… from corporate needs to personal shopping- how likely are you to remain loyal to a company that seems uncaring, disinterested, unresponsive, or distant?

In a company in America, L’Oreal incorporation, sales agents selected on the basis of certain emotional competencies significantly outsold sales people’s selected using the company’s standard selection procedure. On an annual basis, sales people selected on the basis of emotional competence sold more than other sales people did, for a higher net revenue.
In a pioneering EQ project, American Express through a three- day emotional awareness training. In the following year, the trainees sale exceeded untrained colleagues by 2%- which might sound minimal, but the millions of extra earnings off a three day programme convinces the company to expand its EQ training. The Sheraton studio city in Orlando engaged in a year- long project to improve guest satisfaction, sales, and employee morale and collaboration. After conducting an employee climate survey, an outside consultant pinpointed three”hot spot” areas for improvement and engaged in a series of short training sessions to raise awareness and improve EQ skills. The reults were a dramatic increase in guest satisfaction and market share, and a significant reduction in turnover. 

The primary reason people leave a job is relationship based. One of the key factors is the quality of the relationship between the employee and hustler supervisional manager. According to Richard Leider, “people don’t leave companies they leave leaders” what distinguished relationship that lead to retention? Compelling evidence from Gallup shows that it’s all about feelings. In their landmark research of over two million working American the Gallup team identified three critical factors that predict if an employee is “engaged”- and engaged employee are 50% more likely to stay In their jobs.
The three factors that inspire exceptional motivation and productivity are
The employee feels cared foe by their supervisor.
They received recognition or praise during the past seven days from someone in a leadership position.
They believe their employee is concerned about their development.

The US Air Force spends millions of dollars on recruitment every year- but their professional recruitment were only picking  up an average of one recruit per month. A $10,000 investment in EQ testing let them profile the top performers, and in one year they saved $2.7 million. Ultimately the General Accounting Office requested that the secretary of defence order all branches of the armed forces to adopt this procedure in recruitment and selection.

Giving the emerging data, many organization are seeking to gain this performance advantage and are using emotional intelligence testing as part of the recruitment and hiring process.
The Havard Business Review recently reminded leaders that their excellence begins and ends with their inner resources. “Executive who fail to develop self- awareness risk falling on an emotionally deadening routine that threatens their selves. Indeed a reluctance to explore your inner landscape not only weakens your own motivation but can also corrode your ability to inspire others.
In a landmark study of one of the UK’s largest restaurant groups, there was clear evidence that emotionally intelligent leaders were more effective. Managers high in emotional intelligence had restaurants that outperformed others with increased guest satisfaction, lower turnover, and 34% greater profit growth.

The link  between EQ and leadership was also clear at Pepsi Co. In a pilot project, executives selected for EQ competencies far outperformed their colleagues, delivering
10% increase in productivity
87% decrease in executive turnover ($4m)
$3.75m added economic value
Over 1000 return on investment.
In organizations where leadership is most visible, the affect (emotional behaviour) of leaders plays a major role. You can see this clearly in the way some teams “walk on tip toes” when the boss is “having a bad day”. perhaps that’s why one study showed the most effective leaders in the US Navy Use EQ  behaviours they are warmer, more outgoing,emotionally expressive, dramatic, and sociable.

A study of 358 leaders within Johnson and Johnson identified a strong link between superior performing leaders and emotional competence. The conclusion is powerful “Emotional competence differentiates successful leaders”
Shifting to productivity, several studied link emptional competence individuals and leadership to the ability to get work accomplished. For example, a major sales study showed top performing sales clerks are 12 time more productive than those at the bottom and 85% more productive than average performer. About one- third of this difference is due to technical skill and cognitive ability while two- thirds is due to emotional competence.

One inhibitor to productivity is absenteeism.. and emotional competencies tied to stress management are key to reducing this human and financial cost. Workers with high work pressures and poor time management skills are twice as likely to miss work; employees who have strong self management skills cope better with work pressures.
Productivity is also tied to the relationship between the individual and the workplace. Almost a third of some one’s productivity can be attributed to four “human” factors. 28% of productivity is predicted by the presence of useful feed backs, choice in work, seeing the value of the work, and having a positive climate. Research conducted at the Deming centre for quality management found 50% of time wasted in business is due to lack of trust. In other words, emotional intelligence has a profound impact on productivity and individual success. Perhaps that’s one reason why after a MOtorola manufacturing facility used a stress and EQ programmes, 93% of employees had an increase in productivity.
Likewise, after supervisors in a manufacturing plant received training in emotional competencies, lost-time accidents were reduced 50%, formal grievances were reduced from an average of 15 per year to 3 per year, and the plant exceeded productivity goals by 50%. The Gallup research on “engagement” (a sense of emotional connection to the organization) makes the case for the financial rewards of enhancing EQ in organizations.
Teams with higher engagements…. caring.. were 
50% more likely to have lower turnover
56% more likely to have higher than average customer loyalty
38% more likely to have above- average productivity 
27% more likely to report higher profitability 
Businesses around the world are incorporation EQ into their HR practices and systems some of the leaders are as follows 
Alberto Culver (consumer products $2.8 billion) team development & motivation for sales & management 
L’Oreal (personal care products $15.0 billion) recruitment 
Avon products (personal care products, $6.9 billion) management 
American Express Financial Advisors (Financial services $5.6 billion) sales training 
Metlife (Insurance, $35.8 billion) sales, training, recruitment
McNeil (subsidy of J&J pharmaceuticals $6.0 billion) leadership training 
Motorola (telecommunications electronics, $27.1 billion)





































CHAPTER SEVEN (VII)
THE USE OF EQ 
EQ has an impact on your behaviour and the way you interact with colleagues, clients, customers, families, and friends it’s the ability to identify and manage emotions, your own and others, in positive ways. This enables effective communication and facilitates empathy with others. People who have high EQ use their understanding of emotions to relate better to other people
So EQ can help to overcome challenges, anticipate and defuse conflict, form healthy relationships, achieve business success and lead a more fulfilling life.
Here are some EQ tips that may be helpful for dealing with difficult people in your day to day life activities.
It is difficult to control other people’s behaviour, so instead change your behaviour in relation to them. find the most productive means of interaction.
Listen actively and with empathy to gain understanding of their viewpoint.
Be aware of each other’s feelings.
Be aware of each other’s perceptions, look for opportunities to challenge and alter these perceptions for the better.
Seek  common ground, reconcile interest; focus on their other person’s need desires and concerns. Work towards resolutions.
Focus on the problem, not the person, and try to understand what the actual problem is. Then seek ways to resolve it.
Don’t make assumptions about others behaviour, or reasons for it. open and maintain a dialogue.
Be polite and respectful. control your temper and your reactions.
Identify both of your needs.
Use “I” statements and be clear about points of agreement.
Use appropriate body languages to show your support and attention
Ask powerful problem solving questions 
Be polite and civil.
If someone is making life difficult for you, try to be friendly but distant,and not to rise to the bait in the heat of the moment. This may only encourage their behaviour to deteriorate. But it may be that if you don’t give them the emotion reaction they’re seeking, they’ll decide it’s a waste of time trying to get a rise out of you and leave you alone. 
Sometimes people are jealous of your ability and that’s why they react badly to you. If you can let them know you don’t intend to challenge them they may feel motivated to treat you better. Try to strike up a casual conversation, about a non- confrontational topic.
Entrepreneurship for the Rest of us!
BY TITO PHILLIPS JNR.. The Guardian Friday Sept 2004



TYPES OF INTELLIGENCE
1.Intelligence Quotient (IQ): This is the measure of your level of comprehensive. You need IQ to solve maths, memorize things and recall lessons
2.Emotional Quotient (EQ): This is the measure of your ability to maintain peace with others, keep to time, be responsible, be honest, respect boundaries, be humble, genuine and considerate
3.Social Quotient (SQ): This is the measurement of your ability to build a network of friends and maintain it over a long period of time
4.The Adversity Quotient (AQ): This is the measure of our ability to go through a rough patch in life to go through a rough patch in life and out of it without losing your mind. People that have higher EQ and SQ tend to go further in life than those with IQ but low EQ and SQ, most schools capitalize on improving IQ while EQ and SQ are played down.
A person(s) of high IQ end up being employed by people of high EQ and SQ even though he has an average IQ.
Your EQ represents your character, while your SQ represents your charisma



































CHAPTER EIGHT (VIII)

EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE IN NIGERIA
INTRODUCTION PUBLIC SERVICE

We want to first of all thank most sincerely, the organiser of the 8th Beko memorial Anniversary Symposium for considering this great caption “making Nigeria work” as the topic of this year Beko memorial Anniversary Symposium.
Before it is too late for we Nigerians and in the spirit of the ongoing National Political dialogue and open letters, we thought it pertinent that we stir up our own contributions/ conversation regarding how to make Nigeria work, hoping to swoop on opportunities for practice excellence among various stakeholders in Nigeria project especially the public sector I.e the civil servants.

The economic and technological prosperity of our country is ties to the ability of our civil servants to excavate value from the huge resources available in the country. If our civil servants a knowledge are not properly managed we will only make nothing from our efforts to make Nigeria great hence the need to ramp up performance through what is termed as “public sector knowledge management” Before we proceed further, it is better to build a conceptual framework on how public sector knowledge management work in United Kingdom as follows:
1.The British standards institutions view of the distinctiveness of public sector knowledge management.
2.The size, range, complexity and centrality of public sector knowledge challenge 
3.How the British standard institutions believes the public sector provides a perfect “fit” with traditional knowledge management theory.
4.Specific examples of public sector knowledge management studied by the British standards Institution’s Report.

THE BRITISH STANDARDS INSTITUTION’S VIEW OF THE DISTIINTIVNESS OF PUBLIS SECTOR KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
The British standards is the National Standards Body of the United Kingdom responsible for facilitating, drafting, publishing and marketing  standards and related Information products. It has identified knowledge management, and in particular public sector knowledge management, as a key area of interest.
According to the British standards institution (British standards Institution) 2004 public sector knowledge is growing in importance, requiring a distinctive understanding from traditional private sector approaches. The British Standard Institution Report Observed “The understanding and practice of knowledge management has been growing rapidly throughout the public sector over recent years. Yet a constant comment from existing and nascent public sector knowledge management practitioners has been that, until now, most of the analytical literature concerning knowledge management has sought to understand and explain it within a mainly private sector context. There has not been a single, easy to digest national study that objectively and specifically analyzed the growth of knowledge management in the public sector and thereby set out the evidence based public sector context within  which knowledge management can add value to the work of public servants. The British Standards Institutions through this Guide to Good practice has sought to plug this important gap”
According to the British Standards Institution, it is a not uncommon trend for the public sector to lag behind the private sector in its adoption of new management theories or approaches. Experience suggests that the jury is currently still out on public sector knowledge management . the concept of public sector knowledge management is objectively and collectively collating, analyzing and deploying knowledge in an effort to inform, develop and enact the policies of the Government of the day. The British standards Institutions report suggest that whether it is recognized explicitly or not as being knowledge management” there are a range of knowledge and learning based activities going on around the public sector today which are delivering real innovation and demonstrating tangible benefits. The British Standards Institution Report also argues that for the public sector, knowledge is a key component for providing services and developing policy, rather than a market place tool. Knowledge shared in much of the public sector does not mean private sector competitive advantage diminished. It is no surprise that many of the larges and most advanced examples in the United Kingdom of online :sharing best practice’ are to be found amongst group of public sectors staff, often geographically or organizationally dispersed, but working in a common area (e.g Local Authorities, or Health informatics, or development of public sector standards).
The British Standards Institution analysis tests on the argument that public sector organization are clearly a major part of modern knowledge economies. They are also highly diverse in their governance structures, functions, personnel and outputs. We aim to respect this diversity in the report by acknowledging the different experiences of a wide range of organizations. At the same time, it is important to recognize that organizations in the public sector do experience a set of challenge in implementing knowledge management that are not experienced by large swathes of private business.for example, according to the British Standard Institution
The public sector cannot pick and choose its ‘customer’, ‘markets’ or areas of activity it must provides services to every citizens by right and obligation, not sorely by choice or commercial strategy;
The public sector needs to co-operate internally and with a range of external but related organization to meet complex policy goals- it cannot pick and choose its partners
The majority of the explicit knowledge held within the public sector organizations should be capable of being accessed by organizations and citizens through freedom of information fully retrospectively in the UK from January 2005 for all information held by public organization, not just created after January 2005.
The development and implementation of policy is a highly public matter- often involving years of debate, consultation, policy analysis, policy development, design and enactment of legislation and programme delivery and implementation- the majority of which is conducted in the glare of the public eye
The current drive for efficiency and ‘citizen centred’ services is what our public sector should concerned themselves and themselves and the country resources towards.

THE SIZE, RANGE, COMPLEXITY AND CENTRALITY OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR KNOWLEDGE CHALLENGE 
The British Standards Institution report argues that knowledge lies at the very heart of what government does, arguably in a way that is centrally more so than many private sector companies. Not only is the reality importance of information and knowledge greater in the public sector, the sheer size and complexity of the public sector dwarfs most private sectors companies. So the significance and distinctiveness of the challenge in the public sector according to British Standard Institution is four fold of the size, range,complexity and centrality of the sector’s activity.
To back the arguments about the size, range, and complexity of the challenge, the British Standards Institution’s report asks readers to consider the following facts.
Figures published in 2004 in UK cabinet office shows that, at of 1st April 2003, were 512,000 full time permanent civil servants.
This does not include the over 1 million people who for the national health service which if it was a private company would be the biggest company in Europe.
This does not include the hundreds of thousands of public servants who work day-in-day-out in UK schools and universities,local government the police force,Army, Navy, Air force and emergency services
A recent copy of the UK Government’s list of ministerial responsibilities ran to 108 pages, covering the work of III Government Ministers, Government whips and spokesperson in the House of Lords, 19 ministerial departments, 90 Executive Agencies, 9 Government offices for the region and 21 Non-ministerial departments.
Every month, over 647 gigabytes of e-mail is handed by the government secure internet, with over 12 million messages handled overall 6 millions of these messages are handled from the internet. (In 1997, it was virtually impossible to send an internet e-mail within Government.
On average, the stationery office publishes 14,500 new titles per year for her majesty’s Government. There are 45,000 titles currently available from the stationery office stock, with a further 61,490 titles available on demand the equivalent of 322 million pages.

HOW THE BRITISH STANDARDS INSTITUTIONS BELIEVES THE PUBLIC SECTOR PROVIDES A PERFECT ‘FIT’ WITH THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT THEORY
Looking at the centrality of knowledge to the public sector, the British Standards Institution believes we can consider two aspects of knowledge management theory as follows
The relationship between data, information and knowledge 
The interplay between explicit and tacit knowledge 
The types of data that British Standards Institution identified that Government knowledge workers require and produce can be widespread and numerous it gives the following examples;
Official statistical sets and publications produce by the office on National statistics.
Scientific data underpining many policy position
Economic data assessing and analysing the state of the economy
Departmental statistical system, databases and knowledge repositories.
Financial,human resources and performance management information
Project and delivery reporting data
Local and regional data on the implementation and effects of national policies
External information from commercial, academic and international sources. 
According to British Standards Institution, that data begins to become information as is is contextualized and understood by policy maker and policy implementers in their day to day activities. Examples cited by British Standards Institution include;
Within central government, policy option papers produced for discussion and debate of various policy options within policy units, across departments and at ministerial and other committee meetings.
Within local government , health or education, performance management information and analysis both as part of policy delivery and as part of external  assessment
Creation and responses to policy publication and proposals, such as Government Green papers, white papers and policy and delivery frameworks
Speeches, statements, presentations, press releases and articles that have been produced to publicily explain a particular policy or practice
Regulatory impact statements and explanatory notes to bills and Acts of Parliament explaining the intention and/or impact of items of primary and secondary legislation
E-mail discussion, postings, downloads ets available on departmental intranets and.or websites
According to the British Standards Institution, the data and information becomes transferred into knowledge through the application of policy and administrative expertise and experience. In other words, what a knowledge manager would recognize as the interplay of explicit and tacit knowledge.

SPECIFIC EXAMPLES OF PUBLIC SECTOR KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMEBT PROJECTS STUDIED BY THR BRITISH STANDARDS INSTITUTION REPORT
The British Standards Institution Report includes case studies of the following public sector knowledge management projects
The UK Government knowledge network programme
The National college for school leaderships networked learning communities programme
The department of health’s knowledge management programme
The country side agency’s learning networks initiative
Frid, Randy frid framework for enterprise knowledge management; A common knowledge management framework for the Government of Canada 
The ODPM new deal for communities stakeholder involvement programme 
The World Bank’s ombudsman service’s knowledge management strategy.

CONCLUSION
We have examined the concept of public sector knowledge management and how it works in the United Kingdom. The concept of knowledge management comprises a range of practices used by organization to identify, create, represent and distribute knowledge. Knowledge management programme are typically tied to organizational objectives such as improved performance, competitive advantage, innovation, development processes, lessons learnt transfer (for example between project) and the general development of collaborative practices. Knowlegde management is frequently linked and related to what has become known as the learning organization, life ling learning and continuous improvement.
The Nigerian civil servants are the champions of the common man and instrument for social change and should be encouraged to embrace the concept of knowledge management as another opportunity to remind the civil servants of their duty as the champion of the masses and to rekindle the need for the civil servants to remain ever committed to the core principles of public services with a view to build a society that is fair just and livable for all. The civil servant commitment will spur every segment of the state and society to be involve in the Nigerian project.

Thank you.









What is Salary 
It’s vital to let Nigerian youth know that they should never depend on single income. Make investment to create  a second source.
Salary is a specific amount of money that an employee is paid for work done. The big question is which type do you earn?
1.Onion Salary: you grab it you open it, and you cry
2.Storm Salary: You don’t know when it’s coming or going
3.Menstrual Salary: It comes once a month and lasts only four days
4.Magic Salary: You touch it and it disappears 
5.Amnesia Salary: You can’t remember what you spent it on
6.Time Travelling: You spend it paying various debts even before you collect it
7.Active Salary: Once you stop working it stops
But there is another one called RESIDUAL INCOME.

What is Residual Income?
You work once, and it keeps paying you over and over again even after you have stopped working.
whether it’s magic salary, amnesia salary or onion salary, the moment it STOPS coming, your life becomes unbearable financially LITERACY is the tool needed to transform (TRANSFORM) your salary into Residual income, so you can create financial freedom and time freedom. Only your investment can keep you going even after  all the onions, amnesia, travelling, active salaries have left you drenched.
Research has it that the poorest group of people in the world are salary earners, next to beggars.
They live in a vicious cycle of poverty managed on 30 days.
Salary is continuosly being awaited every month and any slight delay brings about heart breaking anxiety pressure and dissappointment.

Salary is a short term solution to a life time problem. Salary alone cannot solve your money problems. You need multiple sources of income to balance.
The tax returns form contains about 11 more income streams, salary is just one. don’t live your life fishing with just one hook, there are many fishes in the ocean.
Salary is the value someone has put on your effort, how much do you have yourself , you can’t increase in value unless you value yourself differently life is a trade off between time, effort and reward. To be rewarded more, you have to become more valuable, most salary earners end up poor in the long and short term. Salary is the bribe they give you to forget your dreams.






EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE IN POLITICS
Democracy was popularly defined and depicted by the statement of Abraham Lincoln “Democracy is the government of the people by the people, for the people. It’s imperative that country should make strategic decisions that will set her on the path to realizing her potentials. A country without strategic master plan, how will she reach a desired destination other than wandering in the wilderness. This is the result of our wilderness wandering of almost 50 years without a compass albeit equipped with the shortsighted development plans of 3 to 5 years that were not well strategically and tactfically structured, monitored and evacuated. There is a pertinent and salient question to be asked; who is to set a strategic direction? Only a government that is inclusive in content and context can chart such a mutual way forward followers and leaders acting in tandem towards the set goals. In some cases, these goals could be audacious but attainable within the context of inclusive (pluralistic) political cum economic institutions built in established sustainable equitable ethics.

One could curious ask: was this the dream our forefathers had in desperately desiring independence from the British in 1960? Democracy if the words of American Lawyer, written and Presidential adviser Theodore Sorensen, are anything to go by. He opined: “the good news, to relieve all this gloom, is that a democracy is inherently self-correcting. Hence, it could be improve and get better overtime unlike military and dangerous. The cerebral and scholastic Professor Chinua Achebe, once posited that Nigeria’s problem is leadership. “the problem with Nigeria” Achebe the internationally acclaimed sagacious critic, novelist and poet later posted: a functioning robust democracy requires a healthy, educated, participatory followership, and an educated, morally grounded leadership”. if the dreams of our forebears and forefathers had about democracy will be fulfilled then, the followers must, as an imperative and instinctive, awake from slumber. There are more questions begging for answers in this direction: how educated or enlightened are Nigerian’s followers and leaders? Are the followers healthy in body, soul and spirit? 
How can they be participatory when poverty has plunimeted their perception and personae? The current (2022) political undercurrent in the two major political party and the emergence of the Third force, the labour party regarding structure, zoning, religion, ethnicity has refused to depict maturity as many leaders within or in a morbid marathonic march towards 2023 and caution has been thrown into the winds. It is unfortunate that we live in a society where leaders care less of followers’s feelings , longing and yearning; our leaders believe that money answers all things as expressed in the Bible, forgetting that the same Bible says that it came to a time in Egypt, in the days of Prime Minister Joseph, that money failed! We are gradually nearing that time, that money will fail our politicians and followers will choose the one that will listen emphatically to them. Equally disheartenings is the internal squabble with the political parties that portends implosion if not carefully handled. Nigeria is the most populous country in sub saharan Africa. In the past decades especially during the oil boom periods post- independence, the then Head- of - State, General Yakubu Gowon RTD is recorded to have boasted that money was not the country’s problem but how to spend it. Whether that statement was made out of youthful exuberance or lack of visionary economic planning is yet to be ascertained from him.
Due to the petro- dollars, Nigeria became the big brother in Africa and even beyond to other developing nations. Most African countries especially the south Africa countries were huge beneficiaries as the country helped a great deal in their fight for independence and the abolition of apartheid. The country was doing relatively well despite the post- independence civil war. Then came the series of coups and couter coups that sacked the civilian government of late Alhaji Shehu Shagari.
Things began to fall apart in Nigeria with all the coups and couter coups and with the nature of military governments with no checks and balances, the Head of State had enormous powers. The economic fortunes of the country began to impact on the people and even with the return of civilian democracy in 1999, it is still difficult for the country to maximize its potentials and reduce the powers of the presidency.
The result is that today, (2022) Nigeria is the Poverty Capital of the world with more than eighteen million out- of- school children, high unemployment and underemployment rates, high maternal and child mortality rates, poor infrastructural development, one of the five most terrorized countries of the world and other sad indices of poverty and underemployment. 

The election that is set for 2023 has literally set the country on the edge as politics of the presidency takes centre stage. The political parties moved from debates on the issue of zoning between North and South to that of ethnicity and now to religion as it concerns the Vice Presidential candidates. Beyond these were also intra- party crisis especially within the two biggest political parties, the ruling All Progressive Congress (APC) and the main opposition People Democratic Party (PDP)
The successive civilian governments seem to have failed in returning the country to the path of development because Nigeria’s democracy seems to have weak legislative bodies at both states and Federal levels. The executive arm of government at both levels seems very imperial often veiled as executive legislative harmony or party loyalty even when the political parties have no identifiable political ideological learnings.

The exagerrated emphasis on the presidency removes attention from the legislature that is equally a strong pillar of any democracy. Since 1999, there has been too much power ceded to the presidency and governors in way that it has affected the democracy we practice.

Democracy thrives on the viability of checks and balances and the Nigerian people must realize that although the presidency is very important, more attention must be paid to the other two arms, the Judiciary and the (5) legislature and because only the executive and legislature stand for election, a lot of attention is needed if Nigeria must make progress. It is delusional to assume that the executive alone can bring the development the country needs.

Nigeria democracy cannot birth development if the system of government has its tenets and can only produce good results when the tenets and are adhered to. The country cannot do the same thing all the time and expect a different result.

We have seen all the recent political events in the united kingdom from June/September 2022. prime Minister Boris Johnson was virtually forces to resign as the head of  the conservative party following the mass resignation of some Tory members of parliament (MPs). the power in any democracy belongs to the people and no single individual or group of individuals can be so powerful that they disrupt the system. The Nigerian people must equally realized that they have to engage the political system and must be involved in the political process by being active participants while the presidency is an important position in any country, the legislature at all levels is equally very important and must get equal attention.

Finally, the head matters a lot. When a president for instance has the knowledge emotional intelligence discipline comes into perspective, the moral strength and experience needed for his position, he would begin to redirect the focus of government agencies and ministries and he will instinctively be able to make changes in the psyche of everyone including the legislature in a way that without being authoritarian, change begins to happen. In the Nigerian circumstance, an emotional intelligence president will have the capacity to lead the country into building a strong system which will in turn impact on all structures of government.

NIGERIA DECIDES 2023.
As Nigeria moves closer to the 2023 elections, most of the candidates who emerged from the different political parties are planning their strategies while keeping an eye on their opponents strategies as well. The campaign period of any election is the most exhausting for candidates but paradoxically, the most exciting for voters who can either be die- hard supporters of the undecided.
The 2023 elections in Nigeria will be like no other in the nation’s political history. Today, the global political situation has changed. The internet is a global phenomenon. There is more awareness and the apathy earlier shown by the youth seems to have faded into the past. The voting demographics are getting more sensitive and aware of the roles of governments in their lives. In all these, information management is the key and both the media and spokespersons of political parties must realise there are ethical lines that must be crossed as we buried our democracy. While politician come and go with their spokesperson and aides, the media and the people will always be around. The media on their own has the ethics of their profession clearly spelt out. Spokesperson have the duty of marketing their candidates but there are rules to the game. They must at all times be ready to provide the media and the people with credible information about their principal and or his activities clearly. If a spokesperson wants the media to have qualitative and factual coverage of the activities of their candidates and their political parties they must have to provide credible information to the media either through the orthodox or social media. They owe the media the responsibility to provide credible information proactively to and factually.

There is the Nigerian Media Code of election coverage which was adopted by media stakeholders in 2018 and endorsed by all media organizations including private media organizations. The code has broad principles under which certain obligations are imposed on certain institutions to make the work of the media easier during the electoral process.

The government, the security agencies INES as the electoral management body and then of course the civil society and the political parties have roles. The political parties are expected to ensure easy access for journalists covering elections and to ensure their safety from any form of attack as they do their jobs. Spokesperson need to understand that there is a media code of conduct that obligates them to facilitate access to the media so that they can cover their events. Spokesperson of political parties need to work with the leadership of political parties and security agencies with the understanding that journalists are also here to do their jobs and must be protected.

The media would not like to be misled and so the media must fact-check thoroughly about sources of information from candidates and the political parties, spokesperson must ensure their information meets basic ethical standards and are factual. They need to understand that there is always the right of reply in the media. 

The media on its own must be guided by the code of conduct which comes in five sections as follows; equitable access, social responsibility, inclusive coverage, avoidance of hate speech and conflict sensitivity. The right of reply is very crucial so that everyone involved in the process will be free to challenge or correct information that they know to be false against a candidate especially in modern times with online news access and breaking news by the seconds.

The media must police the spokesperson by reminding them that if they flout the code of conduct and resort to using invectives or any form of verbal abuse, the programme could be halted immediately. The media is allowed to do that. The broadcast media must realise that the sword of the Broadcasting Organization of Nigeria (BON) can land on their station and they must make their guests comply to the best ethical conducts. Media houses have ethical and professional responsibilities and no matter how much the media want to give space to politicians, no matter how much they want them  to air their own stories, they must also make them understand that there ethical barricades they cannot cross and if their organization must continue in business, the rules must either be obeyed or the platform denies the party.
There is nothing in inter-personal, inter-party, inter-religious, inter-ethnic, inter- racial or any other relationship that works better than robust and civil conversations. The country belongs to all of us, politicians and offices are set for periods, it’s vital for the media to set templates for good communications to grow our democracy. Let the media and party spokesperson be agents of unity in diversity.

How to get Along with Difficult colleagues
it’s easy to get caught up in interpersonal conflict at work or in any association. But these negative dynamics can lead to mistakes, reduced creativity and worse decision-making. Here are four ways accroding to Harvard Business Review to work more effectively with difficult colleagues:

*	Understand that your perspective is limited. It’s not realistic to accept everyone to agree with you all the time. when difference are, as yourself questions like: what if I am wrong? How would I change my behaviour? what assumptions have I made?
*	View the conflict as a problem to be solved together.
Understand what outcome you are aiming for. Do you want to get a project over the finished line? Build a healthy working relationship that will last into the future? Feel less angry or frustrated after your interactions? Decide on your goals before interacting with your colleagues and keep your eyes on the prize.
*	Avoid venting and Gossip. Choose who you talk to (and what you share) carefully. Look for people who are constructive, have your best interests at heart, will challenge your perspective when they disagree, and can be discreet.
*	Eperiment to find what works: Start by coming up with two or three methods you want to test out. for example, if you want improve communications with a grumpy colleagues, decide that for two weeks you are going to ignore their tone and focus on the substance of their message: often small actions can have a big impact.

Everyone make mistakes in life, but that doesn’t mean they have to pay for them the rest of their life. sometimes good people make bad choices. It doesn’t mean they are bad it means they are human. we all are human, we all make mistakes. Mistakes are not wrong, they are here to teach us something and helping us to transform. The judgement and criticism of our mind is, what keeps us stuck from the progress. with less judgement and criticism (ie using the constructuve critic) towards others we will start to be even less self-critical and judgemental and with this, we would grow up into the best version of ourself.



EQ in politics continues
Some prominent persons in Nigeria have expressed the views that the inability of the Igbo as a race to produce the president of Nigeria is an injustice committed by Nigerians and a conspiracy of sorts against the Igbos. I disagree. Some others believe that it is a gang up due to envy of the Igbo as a people. It is false.

It is my purpose to show in the following narrative that far from being a conspiracy or an injustice it is in fact the logical outcome and consequences based on the choices made by the Igbos in the past and even in the present. Life is not so much about conspiracies or injustices, it is also about sowing and reaping; about causes and consequences. Life operates on definite spiritual laws and principles; ythe earth operates on eternal principles that cannot change and will never be changed. These are what determine what goes to one and what comes to the other, without fear or favour, “doing nothing by partiality”. it may appears as if the world is chaotic and a bedlam, a mammoth of iniquity and disorder yes, on the surface, it s so. But as sure as night follows day the world rewards principles and punishes compromises and treachery; if not at the beginning then at the end. What about manipulation and scheming? Even these do not change the laws of nature and the principles that govern the earth. There are three major tribes in Nigeria. The Hausa/Fulani, the Yoruba and the Igbo. Out of the three the Igbo as a race have not produce the president of Nigeria since inception of the Nigeria 4th Republic in 1999 and they think it’s and injustice. Lets us get fact right and see where the concept of Emotional Intelligence will decide who becomes the president of Nigeria in February 2023 presidential Election.
The Igbo political culture of compromises that is at the root of the lacklusture, uneviable position of the Igbos as a people in the political process and equation rather than any conspiracy or going-up as the Igbo scholars and hagiographers have always maintained.
Before I go and to properly anchor this discourse let me make a detour to Israel to illustrate the power of political principles, honour and integrity which are the cores of Emotional Intelligence and how our nation needs this today. Somehow I think Nigerian politicians need to learn a lot more from Israel than even from Britain and America.

In 1948 David Ben-Gurion bcame the first elected leader of Israel in the first ever election after Israel fought its way out of the British Mandate. He was also the most prominent among the leaders and fighters of Israel liberation and the leader of the labour ruling party from the beginning and most prominent people of Israel and the who is who gravitated to “where it is happening”. in fact General Sharon noted in his autobiography that even among the generals and the prominent soldiers, they too belonges to Labour Party Except him.

Against this political hegemon were a number of fringe and small parties along various ideological and religious lines. The most notable was the one led by the dreaded Menachem Begin, leader of the Irgun Liberation movement during the days of struggle against British imperialism and treachery. He became the leader of the opposition in the Knesset and played the role so diligently and marvelously that he put the Labour Party government on its toes continually. He was subjected to ridicules, insults by the leadership but he never wavered, serving the people of Israel as opposition leader and making Government accountable. The point is you don’t have to win elections; serving the people as opposition too is service and would be rewarded some day at the appropriate time. Losing an election on principles is actually winning, if you stand by your principles to the core. 

Menachem Begin was a Jew to the core and he stood for that and fought for it. He was poor, his followers were poor because they were not in government but as opposition for years. Still they continued to serve the people and the people took notice and even the earth took notice.
For more that 30 years Begin served without compromise and without looking back. Then came a day when the Labour Party, intoxicated by its own success and pride was rocked in terrible financial scandals and the people of Israel yearned for a change for once. At the same time Ariel Sharon, warrior and hero of Israel’s war now discharged from the army decided to pitch his tent with Menachem Begin rather than the Labour hordes. A military strategist he carried that art to the political realm nd gathered all the fringe parties under one banner. Thus came the Likud party coalition headed by Menachem Begin, the man of principle without compromise.

Thus in 1977 Israel rejected the Labour Party and opted for the coalition. Thus Menachem Begin became the Prime Minister of Israel in a fair and clean contest having won the largest votes and seats in the parliament. His more than 30 years of serving Israel as opposition leader was rewarded by the people. He eventually got to the highest peak not by compromise but by principles. Principles attract favour, support, reward even if it takes long in coming. It was Begin’s principles that attracted Sharon, the most notable of Israel’s army generals, Moshe Davan, arguable Israel’s greatest strategist and Yitzhar Shamir, among others principles matter. To die as a leader of opposition on principles is better that been a president or compromise. This is what our politicians, ought to learn about Israel rather than changing party like clothes. You wont create a great nation like this except a nation of yahoo boys, SARS, criminals and thieves/rogues.

With this background let us now go into the subject of Igbo and Nigeria. Why does political power at the centre elude the Igbo? Why has political continually evade the Igbo race till now? Most Igbo intellectuals and even scholars believe that is conspiracy. Even our man of letters  Chinua Achebe, against the train of logic and pure reason lends his weight to this permicious and utterly jejune “conspiracy theory”

It’s vital to show that far from any conspiracy or gang-up, it is the igbo race herself that has set herself up for the very situations she now find herself today by her wanton culture of political compromise, playing “the beautiful bride” (an euphemism for political prostitution) by her readiness to play the second fiddle to any rather than stand on her own principles and on her own ground. This, more than any conspiracy or gang-up has been the albatross on the neck of the Igbo race and why it has now been consigned to national political oblivion. I sympathize with many young and energetic Igbo compatriots who have more zeal than knowledge and I feel very sorry for them because they have not really taken the time to study the history; instead they have been armed with the same old jaded false narratives, old woman fables, doctored silly jibes, traditions, libels and innuendos handed to them by their elders, perverse falsehoods that cannot stand the test of historiograohy. Thus their minds have been poisoned against everyone and every tribe because they see others as against them; which is false. If there is anything against the Igbo it is the very culture of compromise, always willing to compromise; always wanting to win and be relevant in all regimes and dispensations. It is a weakness. And this foundation was laid by their own elders from the very beginning.

Let us look at it.
Chief Obafemi Awolowo offered Dr. Nnamdi Azikwe the platform to be the prime minister and he would be in charge of Education and Finance. Awolowo wanted to create the same wonder that he did in th west about education in the whole nation. If that experiment and coalition had sailed we would not be in this mess today because free and compulsory education would have been a reality in all the length and breadth of Nigeria. Imagine where Nigeria should have been today! At least the religious rascals who says book is haram now fighting the state in Boko Haram group and the thousands of youths that have now turned the North to a wallowing desert and demographic disaster as bandits, kidnappers and criminals would not be doing that today.
Alas, zik refused. He preferred instead a marriage with the Hausa-Fulani as a junior partner where he would be ceremonial president without power. You talk of “a leader who prefers to follow: an apt expression used by the late cicero of Esa-Oke, Bola Ige himself. Zik and his associates confirmed this in their lifetime so its authenticity is not in doubt.

That was the foundation of political compromise on which the Igbo would build their shaky political edifice the consequences of which we now see today. Yes it could be argued or surmised that Zik was discouraged and embittered with the way he was treated by the West in 1953, the Great Carpet Crossing in the Western house which made Zik and his party (NCNC) to lose the premiership of the west. Achebe has even gone to the world to tell how he witnessed the “sellout” in the western house in his polemic, THE TROUBLE WITH NIGERIA This incident is most unfortunate and Zik probably never recovered from it. Yet, let the truth be told, the issue of carpet crossing is allowed under parliamentary system of government. It is not a a crime. Also Zik was expecting too much from the west and the yorubas as early as that time How? It is unlikely any tribe would elect or allow someone from another tribe, no matter the degree of its acclimatization to become the first premier of a region. Even the Igbos or the Fulani would not allow it in their domains. This is reality and how human nature works and it is ignorant to continue to flog this issue as if it is strange. Zik, as a political scientist should have read the handwritting that all politics is still first local, that the politics is still primitive and not yet sufficiently grounded and advanced to the point whee people would not ask those type of questions. He should have fielded Adegoke  Adelabu, the stormy petrel of Ibadan politics to challenge Awo, then the case of NCNC would have been made because Adegoke is a son of the soil. At the worse he could remain and the leader of the opposition.

Instead he went to the East to do the very thing he accused Awo of gaing against him, to wrest power from Akannu Ibiam and this setting the Igbos permanently at loggerheads with the Eastern minorities which would later boomerang during the civil war as they too refused to support the Igbo guest and even subverted it. This was how the foundation was laid of what we see today. We sympathize with Zik, a man of learning and erudition, but he probably lack in Emotional Intelligence since he probably overrated the Yorubas, he expected them to do what his own people would never have done, both then or now. It was a mistake and a political error of judgement. It was this incident that probably coloured Zik’s cold reception to Awo’s offer during the independence election of 1959 and forced him into the alliance with the North, thus making the East the “beautiful Pride’ of Nigerian politics a phase that emanated from the very mouth of Zik himself and thus laid the foundation of political compromise and prostitution which today has now earned its rightful consequences and wages by consigning the Igbo as a race into political oblivion and Liberia at the national level.

Sure the Igbo race gained enormously from their alliance with the North in that Independence government. Since they had more educated people than the Northerners they filled all vacant positions with their kinsmen. This was how Chinua Achebe, then a young graduate became the Director of Broadcasting service. This was how the Igbo got into all top positions in government while the Yoruba’s as opposition remained in the lurch-and not because of any distinction or intellectual achievement on the part of the Igbo race as falsely claimed by Achebe in his badly-edited and received book THERE WAS A COUNTRY. On the other hand the smarter northerners took all the strategic facilities and amenities to the North. This is why today we have all our Military schools, Defence academy, Aviation and Military Industrial complexes in the North along Kaduna-Zaria axis.

The yoruba were sidelined since they were in the opposition and they got nothing. Achebe has told a monumental lie that his tribe is the race of achievers referring to how Igbo’s occupied most of the positions of influence in the first republic. But this is not so, it was not because of achievement but on the altar of compromise as stated above because it was their parties in power. As is often the case with all alliance built on compromise rather than principles the two soon went their separate ways. But not without consequences, the worst of which is the civil war 1967-1970 which at the end neutralized all the gains made compromise. That is the wages of compromise.

In 1964, there was an alliance between the Igbos and Yorubas- (UPGA) where it was agreed that the Federal elections that year should be boycotted. In the west and Yoruba’s areas the agreement was followed but in the East elections went on in spite of agreement. To hear some of these Igbo upstarts talk these days you would pity them and their absymal ignorance of even their own history.

Then came the second republic (1979-1983) five parties eventually emerged; National party of Nigeria (NPN), the metamorphosis of the same feudal and aristocratic Northern Peoples Congress (NPC), the unity party of Nigeria (UPN), which was the renewed form of the same old Action Congress (AG) both led by Chief Obafemi Awolowo of the West, the National Peoples Party (NPP), led by Chief Nnamdi Azikwe with the remnants of the old (NCNC) and his associates, the people Redemption Party (PRP) of Aminu Kano of the Northern Elements Progressive Union (NEPU), the talakawas party of the North and the party Great Nigeria Peoples Party (GNPP) led by Ibrahim Waziri who also controlled Borno axis of the North. Again it was clear no party had the wherewithal to win the controlling share of the votes that would make it the ruling power. So again alliance was called for. Here again Zik had an opportunity to change the narrative but alas, he reinforced the error by again proving himself and his Igbo race as the “beautiful Bride’  by joining the NPN in accord thus forming the Federal Government and sharing the plums of the office. 

The UPN led by Awo proposed that in the interest of Nigeria it is not good for the same party to control the Executive and also the Legislature. So the legislators of Zik’s NPP and the Awo’s UPN were in talks with a view to enter into accord to form the opposition at the National Assembly against the NPN. Unfortunately while the NPP, the Igbo party was talking with UPN, it was also talking with the NPN legislators. The result both NPP and NPN formed the government at both executives and legislative levels. This was why Joseph Wayes of NPN became the senate President and Edwin Ume Ezeoke of the NPP became the speaker of the House of Representatives thus leaving UPN which had more senators than the NPP in the cooler. This was how Abraham Adesanya became leader of the opposition. Thus for two times Igbo had an opportunity to forge alliance with progressive from the west on equal and even senior partnership but they chose the feudalists in the north and as junior partners.

The Igbo now says the yorubas are traitors, can you ask what accord have the Igbo reached with the Yoruba that they reneged. It is ways the Igbo who reneged. The Igbo says Yorubas are cowards and the Yorubas asked the Igbo which battle have you fought against the Yoruba that the Igbo won? A Yoruba youth took a radio station at gun point to make a broadcast and he did not run away thereafter, he wanted to be tried as the “mystery gunmen” Another Yoruba lawyer, Gani Fawehinmi, dared and fought a military government to stand still in what ever Tai Solarin calls a “voluntary suicide” Another Yoruba soldier returned home to face court martial or even firing squad when his colleagues took power after he was away rather than seek asylum in foreign land. He is Tunde Idiagbon.
 
A Yoruba politician and civilian engaged his military assistants and coupists in shoot out and even fatally wounded one of them before he was killed. He is Samuel Akintola. While his counterparts in the East ran home to change to their wive’s dresses to avoid been shot and the leader of government himself hiding in foreign land in the guise of medical trip while the nation burned. Adekun Fajuyi would not allow any gang to take his host away, he went out to confront the coup plotters. Do all these sound like cowardice? I think not Obansanjo was warned outside the country of the plot Abacha laid out for him; he still returned.

How do you refer to a race that has produced all these as a tribe of cowards if you are not ignorant and blinded by prejudice beyond recovery. On the other hand, we know the bearded soldier who led his people to war and then ran away to ivory coast. We know the president of a country who travelled abroad for a medical leave and refused to return to take charge at home even after the expiation of the leave because he was afraid of the consequences. We know one Emmanuel Ifeajuna who after plunging the nation into an unpremediated  coup ran away and know from where he came from. We know the young man who declared a state of Biafra and thereafter took okada and ran away from the country. What of Tony Nyiam and Mukoro, did they not run away leaving Gideon Okar, the hero of that abortive revolution, to his fate? Are they Yorubas? 

Another one has surfaced in (IPOB) indigenous people of biafra, he too has ran away before he was rearrested in kenya. Thus we have a tribe that produced more “run aways” and another that has produced more “stay to fight”. unfortunately it is the race that has produced “runaways” that is calling the “stay and be dammed” a race of cowards, traitors.
Although the Yorubas played crucial roles in bringing Jonathan to power especially after the sickness of Yar’Adua and when the cabals were hellbent on frustrating him; it was not long before the Igbo cornered him and possessed him. This cultured of political compromiseand marriage to the North continued through the Third to the Fourth Republic. Bashir Tofa of the NRC got his running mate from among the Igbo to contest against Abiola in June 12 elction in 1999. you would see why many prominent Igbo politicians supported the annulment of June 12 1999 election and when even the Head of state President Ibrahim Babangida was minded to deannul the elections it was mainly Igbo ministers in government who dissuaded him. The book to read on this is professor Omoruyi’s book, THE TALES OF JUNE 12. That was when the foolish narrative was spawned by some Igbo men that the “annulment is not only Injustice that has occurred in Nigeria”. we know the roles played by Arthur Nzeribe and his ABN, Akpamgo, Chukwumerije, Walter Ofonagoro etc in sustaining  another person down without staying down yourself” Amd when Obansanjo came in the Fourth Republic (1999-2007) and Muhammed Buhari decided to run against him it was to the East, the traditional place Northern political alliance and marriage that he want to shop for Chuba Okadigbo.

Then came 2010. shehu Yar’adua was in power but sickly. His deputy was Goodluck Jonathan from the South South geopolitical region. Against all machinations of the cabal and with the active support of the civil societies mostly led by Yoruba sons and daughters , Jonathan became Acting President through Doctrine of necessity and eventually became President when President Shehu Yar’adua died on May 6th 2010. by the time Dr Goodluck Jonathan of Otuoke finally came to power he has become adopted Igbo and he took the name Ebele, Azikwe - a name which like John the Baptist - unknown to his kinsmen and forebears.
Thus began another game of marriage between the Igbo and Jonathan. Here the Igbo took over Jonathan Presidency so completely and totally that even if an Igbo son had been president they could not have gained what they did. All the sensitive posts and the entire Finance sector to the Igbo without considering the consequences. He is an economic illiterate so the consequences of such decision did not occur to him. Thus we have the finance minister, securities exchange commission (SEC) Director General, central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) Governor etc. All from one tribe in a nation whose diversity was its major characteristics. So also was the aviation minister, chief of army staff, secretary to the government etc…. 
In point of fact it seems to be that whenever any position was vacant the Igbo had the right of first refusal under that hideous and profligate government. The Igbo never saw anything wrong with this as long as it favoured them as a tribe, the same thing for which they are now accusing president Muhammadu Buhari (2015-2023) of doing for his own people. Again Jonathan left Yoruba in the lurch in spite of what they did to enthrone him.

But payday always come. Payday came for Jonathan and his advisers it was against this backdrop that the 2015 election was held. Jonathan really provokes the Yorubas by his lop sides appointments and discriminatory procedures but which much more by his monumental corruption that seems to empty the treasury in an era when “stealing was not corruption”. it was here the Igbo race made one of its biggest blunders and miscalculation. Sure they made their biggest gains under Jonathan so it is not surprising that under that government they suffered the biggest setback. It is always like this to those who are mindful of the lessons of history. The German jewry recorded their biggest gains and breakthrough in Germany but also it was the same Germany they suffered their greatest setback 
Thus at the 2015 election the Igbos cast all their eggs into the Jonathan basket in spite of the serial shortcomings and flaws of that corrupt government. They not only voted for him, they also according to okey Ndibe, rigged for him because he promised them 65% of offices if he wins. So the Igbo pot their tribal interest above national interest by attempting to return a government whose corruption is attested to worldwide. And by so doing the Igbo fell out of favour with the national spirit.
Let us look at it this way. How fair is it for someone to promise you 65% of the positions in a nation where there are more than 370 tribes? Yet the Igbo accepted this unfair equation because it would benefit them even if it hurt others and even the constitution. So really the Igbos are not nepotism, they are only against it when it works against them. The 2015 election proved that. I knew then that the Igbo for once has made a mistake that would keep 16 years barring a miracle which can be the peter Obi and his obedient crowd 
As at today October 1st 2022, the Igbo race cannot be found in any of the prominent offices in government from the First to even the sixth position. Even the senate president that used to be reserved for the Igbos no matter what has now been lost. Today look at the political radar in this dispensation and the Igbo race is missing in action, not because of any conspiracy or gang-up but as a natural consequences of cause and effect, of sowing and reaping and finally on the total lack of the concept of emotional intelligence by the Igbo Elites and its people hence it’s desirable for all Igbos to key in and buy this book to change their mindset.

If you use your money, all your money to buy shares in a company and the company folds up, is that the problem of the security and exchange commission? Can you really blame them for ganging up against you ar manipulating the market against you? Can you blame anyone but yourself for not studying the fundamentals before investing?
Those who are accusing other Nigerian tribes of being unfair by not surrendering power to the Igbo come 2023 election do not understand the rules of the game. The office of the president is not a right but a privilege so there is no injustice anywhere. You cannot reap where you have not sown. That rule is true even more so in politics.
In the first and second republic Yorubas played the role of opposition and lost a lot as a result of not being in government. Has anybody thought of that? Yet the heavens did not fall. But one day the earth rewarded the yorubas for their principles when June 12 happened still the kill joys enemies of progress aborted it without knowing or realizing that they were aborting their own glory as well.
Again the Yorubas continued in their opposition which was finally rewarded with the nation finally surrendering that the 1999 election must produce only Yoruba presidential candidates. This is the reward for standing by your principles and fighting for them rather than plaing double game and compromises. That was why I cited the case of Menachem Begin in Israel at the beginning. Everything has its rewards, price and wages. Compromise may fetch you quick gains and sudden fame but at the end it fills the mouth with gravel. However a life of commitment to principles will pay back handsomely in future with patience. 

In essence I wish to say that the present state which the Igbo race finds itself in the political affairs of Nigeria is not an Injustice but it is the natural consequences of law cause and effect. This is what the wages of compromise have brought upon the Igbo. They can change their scrip to change the narrative or they can continue and remain in oblivion. It is their choice. Power does not only come by blackmail or threats, that only make things worse for everyone. It comes by standing on your ground, on your own principles and allow others to meet you based on that not only by falling head over heels for others for quick political gains.
Emeka Odumegwu Ojukwu did something for the Igbos that is even of a major significance than fighting for the civil war. An oxford graduate of history hi,self he knew that the Igbo would never be truly relevant until they too build their own power concretized in a political form. He knew that from history this is how all structures and contest for power through political forces and formation begin. What did he do? He started a party among the Igbos-All progressive Alliance (APGA) this should have been a veritable tool which all Igbos should have rallied round and form into a national party. With Igbos and their economic interests everywhere this should not have been difficult. Then this platform would have reached out to other opposition in other regions and partner with them as senior partner. Unfortunately most Igbo politicians never saw it.

Archimedes wrote: “Give me a place to stand and I will move the World” The trouble today is that the Igbos has nowhere to stand. In the (PDP) people Democratic Party even, the south south has the upper hand; in the (APC) All Progressive Congress, the Igbos are a junior partner who is not in the reckoning. APGA that should have been their own is comatose, sick and, as some would say nigh unto death. So how would an Igbo presidency come to fruition under these circumstances in 2023? Would you tell those who financed their parties and built it into a fighting instrument for power with their money to vacate so that the Igbo can have a short? In essence I feel the Igbo race offers us an object lesson in political participation and essentially on the wages of compromise. I love the Igbo people because I know them, their strengths, potentials, power and their principal flaws and weakness. They are committed, generous, energetic but somehow it seems a mystery to me that even they failed to see some of these hindrances and encumbrances around and about them. Already a trap is being set up before them on the path of 2023 election by same “uneducated northerners” and I am not sure they are aware of it or have seen it. They are deceiving them and they too cannot see that they are being deceived. Again the carpet crossing has started into APC by the South East Governor with the Governor of Ebonyi State David Nweze Umahi where there is nothing for them and leaving the PDP which by now they should own.

Given the strong feelings evoked in the southeast by the perceived imperative of a president of Igbo extraction succeeding president Muhammadu Buhari in 2023, it is understandable that the presidential aspiration of Mr. Peter Obi, presidential candidate of the labour party (LP), has gained consideration particularly among youths in Nigeria. But then, the demand in some quarters that the presidency ought by right to be conceded to the south east in 2023 is of little practical import in a multi party liberal democratic system like ours, which provides that stipulated political offices including the presidency be competed for and winners emerge on the basis of numerical electoral majorities and in compliance with required territorial spread of substantial support.
Obi is often eloquent although his statistics are often inaccurate. He can be entertaining in is presentations even when his policy ennunciations lack concerteness. There is nothing remarkable about his eight-year tenure as the Governor of Anambra state from beyond his claims as regards the humogous amount he left in the state’s coffers for his precedecessor; claims vigourously disputed by the latter, to inspire any great excitement about the developmental prospects of his presidency. But the most serious burden of his aspiration is the way that the Igbos have appropriated his candidacy and the often contemptuous and virtually abusive and insulting disposition of his essentially igbo ethnic support base on social media towards other candidates and anyone who exercises his or her fundamental right to oppose Obi. Yet, he ought to do more to help control and productively channel the emotions and actions of his supporters on social media especially if the young people in question truly believe in his leadership. Those who see nothing wrong in routinely deriding other candidates ad the Thiefnubu, Jagaban it or Atikulooter while he in return is called Obituary ar Obidiots but they will suddenly erupt in anger when a writer takes legitimate literary licence with Obi’s name. An online newspaper published a threat by an Igbo Youth Group, the coalition of South East Youth Leaders (COSEYL), that Tinubu’s campaign posters, billboards or other election materials must not be sighted anywhere in the south east and that a task force had been set up to enforce the order and punish violators. It is not impossible that these are the antics of mischief makers but they must not also be dismissed lightly. In addition to the security agencies demonstrating seriously that such threats will be decisively dealt with as they could cause widespread breakdown of law and order that could prove fatal to democracy if supporters of other candidates behave the same way, political leaders must take the lead in showing their followers the example of political decorum and decency. In an electoral system where no ethnic group or region can singlehandedly produce a president without support from the impression that he out to pursue a sectional agenda and this cannot be trusted by people outside his ethnic enclave is doomed to electoral disaster.  Peter Obi’s presidential quest will be hurt by Kanu Nnamdi and his IPOB reckless and anarchic prosecution of their separatist Biafra agenda especially after the exit of Dr. Goodluck Jonathan administration was  one in which the Igbo were greatly favoured over other ethnic groups along with the Ijaw. Indeed, in an address to the World Igbo Congress in Washington in 2014, President Jonathan pointedly, declaved that “in our dogged determination to develop our country, the Igbos are well represented and in some of these appointments, the Igbos are having them for the first time. Some have said that this government has done more in appointments than any other in our history for the Igbos, but that is a matter for the pundits and historians. Let me state that appointments by this administration across the country, will continue to be based on equity, fairness and competence”

The most powerful political appointee in that administration was the Minister of Finance and Coordinating minister of the economy, Dr Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala. The expansive nature of her nomenclature brought virtually every other minister, department and agency under her supervisory purview making the undoubtedly cerebral Okonjo-Iweals the de facto vice president in the government. But did she handle this enormous responsibility,  power and influence with the necessary wisdom caution and tact? During Okonjo-Iweala’s tenure as Minister of Finance, Igbos were appointed as head virtually all agencies under the ministry. These included Securities and Exchange Commission(SEC) Federal Inland Revenue Service (FIRS), Asset Management Corporation of Nigeria (AMCON), Sovereign Wealth Fund (SWF) and National Pension Commission (PENCOM) among others. Most annoyingly, when asked in an interview why this was so despite the Federal Character principle in the constitution, Okonjo-Iweala insensitively responded that the positions were filled through competitive process and it was not her fault if her people were good at competing. As a media strategist and public relations practitioner, Yushau Shuaib, noted in an article in premium times on march 2013, “people are wondering at the coincidence of only Igbos beating every other person at competitive interviews conducted by er nominated international consulting groups” unfortunately, this kind of brazen Igbo bias in appointments and promotion was also widely perceived as going on under senator Anyim Pius Anyim as secretary to the Government of the Federation (SGF) in the same regime. At that time under Jonathan, as the Igbos savoured their favoured time in the sun, there were hardly any biafra separatist agitations and Nigeria was not routinely labeled as a zoo among other devisive names by igbo irredentist movements. Indeed, in reference to the perceived excessively Igbo-centric character of the Jonathan administration, the Nothern Senators Forum (NSF) has publicly lamented what it called gaping marginalization against the North over appointments and promotions in the military and lopaideness in favour of Igbo officers in the Army. It is not unlikely that the perceived sectional imbalance in the constitution of the security high command under Buhari is partly a reaction to the excesses of the influential Igbo appointees under Jonathan in this regard.
But for the late Chief (Mrs) HID Awolowo and the retired Bishop of Akure, Rt. Rev. Bolanle Gbonigi who after a meeting of the Yoruba Unity Forum (YUF) in Ikenne, accused the Jonathan administration of sytemic discrimnation against the Yoruba nationality in Federal appointive positions and ethnic cleansing against the Yoruba in the federal bureaucracy, the Yoruba calmly accepted their fate under Jonathan and kept their peace. But then with the way the Obi prresidential aspiratiion is being driven as an essentailly Igbo project, is there no reason to fear that were the labour Party to realise his ambition, an Obi presidency would be readily ‘captured’ by his Igbo Kinsman and the Okonjo-Iweala and Anyim Pius type ethnic biases would be experienced on an  even more expansive scale? There is surely some good reason to be and there is precedent to cite. In January, 1966, the Major kaduna Nzeogwu led coup that dislodged democratic rule in the first Republic had been initially widely applauded and well received despite the masterminds being mainly Igbo officers as well as the ethno-regionally loopsided character killings of political leaders and military officers in the execution of coup. A few months into the regime of military Head of State, (1960) General Aguiyi Ironsi of Igbo origin, however, strong suspicions began to grow in many quarters that there may have indeed been sectional motivation behind the coup.
As the renowned political scientist professor Billy Dudley, an Itshekiri scholar, stated in his classic, instability and political order: politics and crisis in Nigeria “By May 1966 There was, it seems a widespread belief in the North (This was also true of the west) that the Ironsi regime was essentially aimed at the advancement of the Igbo, possible with the intention of establishing an Ibo hegemony in the Federation. The dismissal of some air force cadets of Northern origin in April 1966, the uncritical acceptance by Ironsi of Nwokedi’s proposals for the unification of segments of the civil services, and the close association between members of the intelligentsia (which did not pass unnoticed) these were all seen as part of some calculated plan directed at displacing non Igbo from status positions in the Federation. In the North itself the incautious behaviour of individual ibo men did little to detract from this belief”

Professor Dudley who was teaching at the Ahmadu Bello University(ABU), zaria, at the time cites one example of the Igbo lack of emotional intelligence in the North. In his words, “outside the university, the practice of Igbo men holding up Northerners to ridicule had become a common enough experiences. Pictures of Nzoeogu with one foot over the corpse the slain premier of North, Sir Ahmadu Bello, symbolic of the downfall of the North, and the ascendancy of the East abd the Igbo, were to be found on sale in the markets in the North. These and other petty humiliations were reported to the Attorney-General of the Federation, Mr Gabriel Onyuike, but thinking they were harmless practical Jokes, he dismissed them, refusing to take any action.
Today in cosmopolitan Lagos, for instance, some Igbo residents are routinely known to say in public that Lagos is no man’s land and they have equal stake in the state given their extensive economic activities there. Not even the Yoruba from other South West states in Lagos are thet provocative and brazen in their relationship with he lagos indigenes. The Hausa community which has a history of existence in Lagos that spans the last 200 years, is not known to make such claims. It is not natural to wonder then if the actualization of an Obi presidency will not afford igbos the opportunity to seek to realize their Ill-disguised imperial, expansionist ambitions in Lagos and possible other urban agglomerations outside the South East where they reside in Substantial numbers? It is legitimate apprehension. In August 2022, there were rumors that has gone viral on social media featuring pictures of Obi and his Vice Presidential candidate, Yusuf Baba Ahmed, who are purpotedly billed to address the supposed anniversary rally of the #endsars protests at the Lekki toll gate, Lagos, on October 1 2022. if such a plan indeed exists, it is a recipe for predictable violence and bloodshed given the current ethnically changed political atmosphere created by the exuberance of the Obidien crowd notably in Lagos. The #endsars protests were organizes as a nationwide activity against human right abuses by the disbanded special anti-robbery squad (SARS) nut in Lagos took a particularly destructive partisan and ethnic turn with loss of lives and property worth over 2 trillion Naira destroyed. To attempt to link Obi’s Labour Party in this way with the #endsars incident in Lagos will reinforce the impression that the massive destruction in the state and the reckless allegations of massacre at the Lekki toll gate plaza without credible proof till date were motivated by cynical ethnic and political calculations that are now coming to light.

It’s very astonishing that there is so far no single Igbo columnist of Journalist and hardly any Igbo intellectual who has public written an opposition of Obi’s aspiration even through the Igbo political establishment is either outrightly cold or lukewarmly indifferent to his politics. On the other hand, there are scores of Yoruba intelligentsia who are vehemently opposed to Tinubu’s candidacy just as many members of the Northern intelligentsia have been severely critical of Atiku as is quite normal. For practically all Igbo public intellectuals, however, Obi is a saint and the other Major candidates are irredeemable devils who are roundly demonized. This is abnormal and shows how Igbo lack the concept of emotional intelligence. It looks more like a conspirational attempt at an ethnic power grab than democratic forces at p[lay. This Igbo ethnic albatross is one big hurdle that Obi and his Labour Party must cross if he is to attract the necessary cross-national support without which it is impossible to win a presidential election in Nigeria.

Atiku Abubakar was born in Jada, a village which was formerly under the administration of the British Cameroons, which later joined the Nigeria. He became the only child of his parents, Garba Abubakar and Aisha Kande when his only sister died at infancy. Abubakar is married to four wives and has been blessed with twenty eight children.
At an early age of eight, Abubakar started schooling at the Jada primary School Adamawa which he completed in 1960. in the same year Abubakar was admitted into the Adamawa provincial secondary school in 1965 after he made grade three in the West African Senior School Certificate Examination.
Abubakar continued to study at the Nigeria Police College in Kaduna. He progressed to work as a tax officer in the regional ministry of finance; he gained admission to the school of Hygiene in Kano in 1966, where he finished with a diploma. He later enrolled for a law Diploma at the Ahmadu Bello University institute of Administration where he obtained Diploma in Law. Abubakar was employed by the Nigeria Custom Service after graduation in 1969. He is known to be a serieal entrepreneur; he served with the Nigeria Customs Services for twenty years, and at some point became the deputy director, the second highest position held within the system. Abubakar has been in the government system for a long time, precisely 1980s. He was elected National Vice Chairman of the peoples front of Nigeria (PFN0) which was denied registration by the military government. The (PEN) merged with the social democratic party (SDP). he contested for the SDP presidential p0rimaries in 1993 where he came with 2066 votes. He also showed interest in the contest for the gubernatorial seat of Adamawa state under the United Nigeria Congress Party. 
In 1998 Abubakar joined the people’s Democratic Party (PDP) and won the December 1998 governorship election for Adamawa State but also received an option to be running mate with olusegun Obansanjo to the PDP presidential seat in 1999, and won the election Abubakar lasted as the Vice President of the Federation in the first and second term, although joined the Action Congress (AC) in 2006 toward the 2007 election, where he came third position. He returned to the PDP and in october 2010, he announced his intention to contest for the president’s office which he lost in the primaries stage by having 805 votes compared to Goodluck Jonathan who sarnered 2736 votes. In 2014, he joined the All progressive Congress (APC) in a bid to run for the president’s office but he lost at the primary stage to president Muhammadu Buhari, the incumbent with (3430) votes, Rabiu Kwankwaso (974) and Atiku himself with (954) votes.
He announces his exit from APC and claimed to return home as he joined the PDP in December 2017. he campaigned and won the primary election for 2019 under PDP, but lost to the incumbent president who won with over 3 million votes against him.
He is now the presidential candidate of the PDP after the primary held in Abuja in June 2022.

Abubakar as an entrepreneur is into real estate, which he started long ago in 1974, when he applied and was given a loan of 31,000 Naira which he used to build his first house in Yola; he eventually purchased lands and continue building houses he would usually rent out, and eventually he built a portfolio of property in Yola Nigeria.
Atiku also ventured into the Transportation sector of business; he joined Gabrielle Volpi and and Italian businessman in Nigeria to create the Nigeria Container Services (NICOTES), a logistics company that operated within the Apapa parts. He also co-founded Intels Nigeria Limited, which at a point featured in an accusation of money laundering by the US government.
Atiku generated other business which include an animal feed factory, Adama Beverages Limited, among others, he also plays on the education sector of the nation’s economy. He is the founder of the American University of Nigeria (AUN). He also owns television and radio station, GOTEL communications.
Bola Ahmed Tinubu, fondly called Asiwaju of Lagos and Jagaban (a title given to him in Borgu kingdom, Niger state) was born in Lagos state, South West, Nigeria. He attended both primary and secondary in Nigeria before he went to the United States to study at the phenomenal Richard J. Dailey college in Chicago, Illinois at the age of 23 years. He later obtained a Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (Accounting and management).
Tinubu is a muslim who got married to Oluremi Tinubu, who is a senator representing Lagos Central Senatorial District. He is blessed with four children namely Jide Tinubu (Now late) Oluwaseyi Tinubu, Folashade Tinubu (Iyaloja General) and Abibatu Tinubu
Tinubu started his career when he worked for the renowned American Based organization Authur Anderson, Delo,He Haskins and Touche where he practices auditing and management consultancy services of General Motors and also, he worked for on of the largest communication and utility companies in the United States of America GTE service Corporation. He also served at Mobil United Kingdom. Tinubu returned to Nigeria in 1983 and joined Mobil oil, Nigeria. He eventually became senior Auditor in Mobil Oil and retired as the Company’s Treasurer. Tinubu Political career in Nigeria began in 1990s when he joined the Social Democratic Party (SDP) and was also elected as a senator in the Federal Republic of Nigeria, where he represented Lagos West Senatorial District. Tinubu became the chairman of the Senate Committee on Banking, Finance, Appropriation and Currency at the National Assembly. He further became one of the founding members of National Democratic Coalition (NADECO) which was a body that rooted for the winner of the June 12 1993 election. 
He was a protege of Abraham Adesanya and Ayo Adebanjo, leaders of Alliance of Democracy (AD). He defeated his opponents, Funsho Williams and Wahab Dosunmu. In the 1999 Gubernatorial election, he won the position of governor of Lagos State.
Tinubu as the Governor of Lagos State between 1999 and 2007 made investments in education, initiated new road construction, required to meet the needs of the fast growing population rate of the state at the time; just as he won the election in 1999, he was also re-elected as the governor, and his deputy Femi Pedro in 2003, where he was the only governor tin the South East who didn’t fall through PDP.
Tinubu was also active in the creation of the Action Congress (AC) a political party. He was succeeded as a Governor by Babatunde Raji Fashola (SAN), who was his Chief of staff. 

Asiwaju Bola Ahmed Tinubu (a.k.a Jagaban Borgu) is Nigeria’s most successsful and living politician (after president Muhammadu Buhari who’s on record to be the only Nigerian Politician-dead or alive who made conscious and determined effort to be president and succeeded;) has invested so much into the Nigeria Project. 

It takes a man of high emotional intelligence to do what Tinubu has done in the life. It takes more than certificate to be married as a Muslim to a person of Christian faith in the level of a pastor of a mega church and remain happily married with the wife for over forty years. It is no longer a secret that the former Governor of Lagos State and easily one of the most influential politicians in Africa, Asiwaju Bola Ahmed Tinubu, has his gaze firmly fixed on the Nigerian Presidential seat in Abuja in the election of Nigeria in 2022. let me put it more frontally, Tinubu will love to drop the Chieftancy title, Asiwaju, for that of President Bola Ahmed Tinubu. Who wouldn’t anyway? Tinubu stuperdous resources, extensive networks, public service experience and achievements and so on. I have heard many ill-informed commentators saying “Lagos had been made Lagos before Tinubu” So, today the legacies of Tinubu’s administration’s reform as the Governor of Lagos State in the civil service, Judiciary, Local Government system and administration, policing and security system, revenue generation, transportation system, infrastructure renewed and revolution, as well as Job creation were quite phenomenal and enduring till today. The creation of agencies like LASEMA, LASTMA, LAMATA, LASRRA, LASAA, LASAMBUS, BRT and LASWA, KAI BRIGADE, Neighbourhood policing and 37 additional Local Council Development Authorities, where several thousands of people work and earn income with which they take of their dependants.
Tinubu’s government in 2000 contracted Enron to build an independent power plant that will generate 270 mega watts of electricity to Lagos residents in order to exit the irrational power supply being provided by the Federal Government. The 270 MW is now part of our national grid. It’s the first of its kind, Tinubu electrification project covered 100 rural communities in Lagos State. In order to bring governance closer to the people of Lagos State, Tinubu created extra additional 37 Local Development Council (LCDAs) it was the ingenuity of Tinubu’s administration that brought about the phenomenal wonder we now ssee on the Atlantic Ocean in Lagos, which is known as Eko Atlantic City. Tinubu’s administration also created the master plan for the development of Lagos State which included the Lekki Free Zone in Lekki, where the world’s biggest refinery (Dangote Petro- Chemical Company), a giant gas plant and fertilizer company, manufacturing organizations, an automible assembly plant and more than thirty other industrial establishments are being built including Nigeria’s deep seaport and modern Airport are to be sited, Tinubu is a phenomenon, whose abilities are not comprehensible to his adversaries and he is not in anyway comparable to Atiku of PDP or Obi of LP in political sagacity, international connections, administrative acumen and organizational skills, creativity, private sector influence, generosity and human compassion, as well as management of human and material resources. It’s obvious that out of the major candidate for the Nigeria 2023 Presidential election Tinubu has the grasp and knowledge of the concept of Emotional Intelligence than the rest of them. Tinubu is the modern day fisher’s of men in Nigeria politics today. These are some of the people’s names that have worked and graduated from what I called Bola Ahmed Tinubu School of Leadership 
1.Professor Yemi OSIBANJO (SAN) V. President 
2.Honourable Femi GBAJABIAMILA speaker House of Rep
3.Babatunde Raji FASHOLA Former Governor 
4.Babajide SANWOOLU Former Governor 
5.Akinwunmi AMBODE Former Governor 
6.Gboyega OYETOLA Governor 2022
7.Rauf AREGBESHOLA Former Governor 
8.Adams OSHIOMOLE Former Governor 
9.Kayode FAYEMI Former Governor 
10.Rotimi AKEREDOLU Former Governor 
11.Senator Ibikunle AMOSUN Former Governor 
12.Late Senator Abiola AJUMOBI Former Governor 
13.Honourable Femi PEDRO 
14.Dr. Idia ADEBULE 
15.Late Senator Adebayo OSINOWO 
16.Seanator Oluremi TINUBU 
17.Senator Ganiyu SOLOMON 
18.Senator Olamilekan ADEOLA 
19.Senator Babafemi OJODU 
20.Honourable James FALEKE 
21.Senator Olorunibe MAMORA 
22.Senator Tokunbo AFIKUYOMI 
23.Senator Gbenga ASHAFA 
24.Senator Adetokunbo ABIRU 
25.Senator Musiliu OBANIKORO 
26.Alhaji Lai MOHAMMED 
27.Senator Opeyemi BAMIDELE 
28.Honourable Adefulure ORELOPE 
29.Honourable ABIKE DABIRI-EREWA 
30.Dr. Muiz BANIRE 
31.Dr. Lekan PITAN 
32.Dr. Kayode OPEIFA 
33.Dr. Ben AKABUEZE 
34.Honourable Adeyemi IKUFORIJI
35.Honourable Mudasluru OBASA 
36.Honourable Toyin SURAU 
37.Honourable Tajudeen AJIDE 
38.Honourable Dele ALAKE  
39.Honourable Tunji BELLO 
40.Mr. Babatunde FOWLER 
41.Honourable Lanre OGUNYEMI 
42.Honourable Ayo ADEWALE 
43.Honourable Ladi Balogun 
44.Honourable Kamal Balogun 
45.Honourable  Sunday DARE 
46.Honourable kehinde BAMIGBNETAN 
47.Mr Muri OKUNOLA 
48.Honourable Rasaq AJALA 
49.Honourable Ebitimi AGBARE 
50.Honourable Yemi Alli 
51.Honourable Bayo OSIYEMI 
On Friday 21st of October 2022 Tinibu revealed his plan to skew the country system of government in favour of bigger autonomy for the federating states if elected as the president of Nigeria. In his 80 page campaign document tagged RENEWED HOPE 2023 Action plan for a better Nigeria unveiled by President Muhammadu Buhari at the state House Banquet Hall during inauguration of the APC presidential campaign council in Abuja. 

Finally the campaigns for the Nigeria 2023 Elections begin on the 28th of September 2022. The All progressive congress (APC) band the People’s Democratic Party (PDP) were enmeshed in the balancing act of constituting their presidential campaign councils. If disharmony still lurks in their councils they will summon all the diplomatic tact necessary to paper over the cracks. They will, however meet with varying degrees of success. But once underway, they should be able to match and outpace the feisty Labour Party (LP) crowd, though majority of voters will not bother about rallies, let alone road walks. The Labour Party is a small party with a dreamy and pertinacious presidential candidate, Peter Obi. Because he embodies and now revifies a party that was initially doomed to anonymity, his presidential campaign council will neither be prone ro serious disharmony nor complicated. Take Peter Obi out of the party, and the Labour Party dread nought will sink under the weight of its insignificance and vacuity. Somehow, the New Nigeria Peoples Party (NNPP) has begun to recede from the political space and the electorate’s consciousness. If its leaders do nothing to reawaken it from slumber, it will fade altogether. 

The Leading contenders for the diadem still remain the APC and the PDP. Since May and June 2022 when they had their primaries, party leaders and candidates including voters have engaged in feverish calculations over the possible outcomes of the coming polls. They are right to analyse the geopolitical colouration of the voters and try to assign weights to the zones. They are also right to second guess the country on what the prevailing moods are, whether they favour the same faith ticket of the APC or embrace the Fulani North ticket of the PDP. Indeed, they cast furtive and anxious of the LP, but they are unlikely to be considerably fazed by Mr Obi’s doggedness, at least not until the battle is truly and irrevocably joined. However, all the parties who imagined they stood a chance of making a strong showing at the presidential poll or even winning it when the spade work started earlier in the year may have begun to reassess everything anew. 

PDP devotees are unsure how their party’s chairmanship controversy would be resolved but however it is resolved will definitely impact their presidential bid. Dr. Iyorchia Ayu, their beleaguered  chairman, will be consulting party leaders to determine his next move. He is loth to relinquish his position, and the candidate, Atiku Abubakar, is especially fond of Dr, Ayu, the indispensable tool for his coronation as standard bearer. But the southern wing of the party led by the intransigent Rivers State governor Nyesom Wike advocates for rotation in favour of a chairman from the south preferable the South West. The Southern Wing’s campaign resonates with many party members and leaders, though some have already reconciled themselves to the status quo. If Atiku Abubakar is merely playing hardball, and is in fact willing to let go of Dr. Ayu, the party will hope that significant damage had not already been done to the party fabric by the needless controversy. Mr. Wike himself, as the soul of the internal opposition in the party, will also have to determine that he had not taken his rebellion too far to the point of no return. If reconciliation is done and a Southern chairman emerges , it will remain for the Wike crowd to do some introspection on whether after all is said and done Atiku can ever be trusted again. The governor had dismissed him as unreliable and divisive; would his concession, should it happen, not be interpreted as Machiavellian?

As the campaigns rec to life, LP’s Mr. Obi has opportunistically scheduled repeated interactions with Mr. Wike and his camp. But the Rivers governor is more astute and calculating than his volubility or irreverence suggests. Given his politics and assertiveness, it is not clear what his instincts tell him. Can he flourish in the mist of Mr. Obi’s crowd to whom even the LP candidate is a captive? The aspirations of the LP supporters are decidedlys not ideological; they are coloured by impatience, brusqueness, intimidation and perhaps other ignoble interests. Students of leadership, not to talk of students of politics and history, are privately dismayed by the predilections of the crowd around Mr. Obi, not to say the candidate’s own amorphousness and controversial idealism. Mr. Wike has been unable to reach realistic accommodation with APC leaders and candidate, despite a few rounds of negotiations, and despite sharing many tendencies with Bola Ahmed Tinubu. It would be surprising to see him in bed with Mr. Obi with whom he is truly and inherently dissimilar.

The APC also boasts of some rough edges. Their presidential primary and the victory of Tinubu were textbook perfect. Both the organization and outcome of the primary came against the run of play. Few expected them to have it so spectacular; but they did. However, constituting their campaign council has been fraught with arguments, secret memos and misunderstanding partly caused by remnants among the party leadership whose ego had been bruised. Worse, the party’s campaign will have to walk the tightrope of gauging jut how gingerly to distance itself from the controversial records of the Muhammadu Buhari administration and at the samr time profit from the undeniable achievement of the same administration Atiku and Obi will run against the Buhari record, and their campaign will resonate with a chafing and disgruntled public. Tinubu cannot, and should not, lest he should alienate the sizeable Buhari supporters who have remained grateful to him for single mindedly promoting and supporting their idol in 2015 and 2019. the APC, not withstanding its same faith ticket will acknowledge the work it needs to do in promoting political and religious inclusivity, but emphasize, project and appropriate the phenomenal work done in infrastructural and agricultural renewal.

Apart from the geopolitical dynamics expected to influence the outcome of the February poll, which at the moment favours the APC, focus will rest heavily on how believable the candidates are un respect of their campaign promises and how convinced voters are that their leadership, if they take the reins of power, would be transformational. Atike is largely conservative and has shown no demonstrable depth in managing large political entities or in envisioning the great society. As for having the courage of his convictions, Wike says the former vice president cannot be trusted. Hid flip-flop over the open and disgraceful murder of Deborah Samuel in Sokoto State in May 2022 indicate how amoebic his principles and values have become in his desperate bid to preside over Nigeria.

Obi has been more fortunate in believability and has even begun to think he can win. He projects honesty and sacrifice as the twin credo of his politics. For his supporters who put their privations in Nigeria down to dishonest and corrupt leaders, this Obi trait appears to be all they want and need. The LP candidate Obi has shown little fidelity to statistics which he shoots at the public while in inebriate by the glibness of his rhetoric. His two terms as a state Governor, he continues to emphasize, were noticeable not for economic or industrial transformation of Anambra but for frugality. He proposes to preside over 200 million Nigerians but has not propounded any significant economic ideas and models capable of transforming Nigeria. How he hopes to persuade the public to vote for him when he has not managed to persuade himself about what he believes or hopes to do is a mystery. He is satisfied that his supporters are not a questioning lot, and that they have only a vague notion that once an honest person takes office, somehow the jog-saw would fall into place. He also seems satisfied that his supporters do not demand substance from him; and when he makes his inevitable statistics slips, they either ignore his failings or downplay his fallacies. But in the end, the votes will be determined by geopolitically, particularly by the silent majority who have neither adapted to the religious rhetoric inundating parts of the country nor succumbed to the extravagant rallies and fierce statements made by some of the candidates. Of the three leading contenders, Nigeria’s power brokers who herd votes will determine whether to risk supporting Atiku and inadvertently endorse the alienation that is certain to lead to schisms in the polity as a result of putting another Fulani man in office. Even the christian brethren have wailed against the same faith ticket and gravitated towards Obi will wonder whether they would not inadvertently put Atiku in office. (after, vice president Yemi Osibanjo has done little to mitigate the gregarious parochialism of the Buhari administration ). they will have to decide whether to follow the self centered agenda of Babachir David Lawal or Hon. Yakubu Dogara, all of whom have dangerously whipped up emotions over the APC same faith ticket.

The campaign for 2023 Nigeria have just begun, but the suspicion is that the country’s power brokers and their captive electorate fear that PDP ticket would invariably promote alienation and ultimately destabilization, while the LP ticket with its feisty support base among some youth across the nation as well as South East voters might in the final analysis engender and reprise the kind of conflict that led the country to a maelstrom decades ago. They may have reservations about the APC ticket, and even feel or suspect that the ruling party’s candidate may be too strong willed to be malleable, but they see his as the safest bet for the future.


EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE IN LEADERS 
A Leader’s role is greatly diminished without their team. No one can do anything by themselves, and no one knows everything. It’s so important to inspire, motivate and empower your team to become the very best version of themselves.

Bring out that greatness in your team by challenging their assumptions of what they can accomplish. Everyone has something special inside them; all it requires is someone to help believe that anything is possible when you believe in yourself.
That’s leadership; that’s what leaders do. You are privileged to be in a position where you can direct, shape and focus someone’s potential on specific result. When you are given responsibility to lead, you are given an awesome opportunity to influence many people’s lives positively; a responsibility you should never take for granted. Great things in business are never done by one person. They’re done by a team of people. 

The culture of any organization is shaped by the worst behaviour the leader is willing to tolerate. When toxic employees’ negative behaviours are tolerated, it can significantly affect the hoe customers are treated, and so much more. People in leadership position will often look for a quick fix, but its not that simple. It’s easy to blame the hiring process or one individual employee, but unfortunately, the buck stops with you as the person who sits in the leadership position. You need to take full responsibility for the low morale of your department or organization and urgently address the situation before all the good employees leaves and the toxic remains. If you find yourself excusing toxic behaviours by saying “that’s just how they are” you are part of the problem. A leader’s not to do the work for other’s it’s to help others figure out how to do it themselves, to get things done, and to succeed done, and to succeed beyond what they thought possible. Integrity is what you do when no one is watching; it’s doing the right thing all the time, even when it may work to your disadvantage.

Integrity is keeping your word. Integrity is that internal compass and rudder that directs you to where you know you should go when everything around you is pulling you in different direction, some people think reputation is the same as integrity, but they are two different things. Your reputation is the public perception of your integrity. Because it’s other people’s opinion of you, it may of may not be accurate.
It’s important to note that others determine your reputation, but only you determine your integrity. Integrity is doing the right thing even when no one is watching.

Today’s most influential businesses encourage every employee to take on leadership roles because one of your first responsibility as a leader is to help your people become leaders.

If you are comfortable with people in your organization coming to work everyday, doing the same mundane task for 5, 10 or 15 years with no self development, you are not a leader, you are an average manager at best, what separates the average organization from the great ones is a leadership culture that cultivates great leaders.

It’s not about maintaining followers; it’s about cultivating and developing a new generation of great leaders, inspired and motivated to make a difference in the lives of the people they are entrusted to serve. True leaders don’t create followers they create more leaders. 
Many people are promoted or recruited into a leadership position without understanding the fundamental philosophy of leadership. It’s all about people.
As a result, we have many companies severely over- manages and grossly under led leaders live their purpose by serving others and inspiring their team to lift the organization to higher performance levels.

Leadership is all about people. It is not about organization. It’s not about plans. It’s not about strategies. It is all about people motivating people to get job done. You have to be people centered.

You can’t control everything. Sometimes you just need to relax and have faith that things will work out. Let go a little and just let life happen. Anxiety happens when you think you have to figure out everything all at once. Breathe. You’re strong. You got this. Take it day by day. There’s no magic formula for great company culture. The key is to treat your staff how you would like them to be treated. For many, it’s easy to bank out orders, boss people around and create an environment of fear to get things done, but inspirational leaders are different, they have a great energy about them that inspires the best in you. They lead by example, show appreciation for their teams, and don’t allow their position of authority to make them feel that they are better than anyone else. Becoming a great leader requires work;  it is not an overnight thing. You will have some very challenging days, and sometimes, you may even doubt your ability to lead. don’t be too hard on yourself; it’s a natural part of the process. Never lose hope, hold onto your faith and continue your leadership development because every increament improvement brings you one step closer to becoming truly an inspirational leader. Let us examine this 11 characteristics of a Truly inspiring leaders; 
1.They have great positive energy 
2.They truly value everyone on their team
3.They have a clear vision for the future 
4.They listen
5.They communicate effectively 
6.They are passionate 
7.They are very trustworthy 
8.They practice humility and empathy 
9.They are authentic
10.They have a sense of purpose 
11.They have a great sense of humor.

To successfully navigate all the disruptions in today’s fiercely competitive world, we need a new generation of purpose-driven leaders who can inspire people to believe that they can achieve the unimaginable. We need leaders to stand up for their employees, to lead by example, and to create an environment that their employees will love. Management is about persuading people to do things they do not want to do, while leadership is about inspiring people to do things they never thought they could do.

One of the most difficult lessons many leaders learn is the necessity to welcome and tolerate disagreement when you’re in a leadership position, it can be difficult to hear others suggest that your ideas or opinions may be wrong.
Weak leaders take disagreement personally, they feel threatened, offended, and attached when their team challenges their ideas and opinions. They react by waving off disagreement as unimportant; worse, they remove those who disagree with them. This ultimately leads to a team of individuals who feel undervalued and uninspired. 
Great leaders not only welcome and tolerate disagreement but also surround themselves with individuals who feel comfortable providing criticism and alternate perspectives; They seek individuals to be inner circle who will challenge and question their decisions, ideas and initiatives.

Embrace diversity of thought because having diverse people and views on your team helps leaders make better decisions. Good leadership requires you to surround yourself with people of diverse perspective who can disagree with you without fear of retaliation.
When you are called to lead you are called to serve, and you must be willing to place the needs of others above your own when you are called a leader, you must ensure that your team is inspired and motivated daily to make a difference. That’s what real leaders do. You are a true leader when you help your team become successful. Remember leadership is not about you, it’s all about the people you serve.
Stress makes you believe that everything needs to happen right now. Faith assures you that everything will happen at the right and perfect time.
This is one of the most depictions of Emotional Intelligence in recent time and here’s why threaded is the value of respect both for ourselves and for others.

Emotional Intelligence and Respect.




Respect is at the core of every great leader’s influence. Remember:You Why	 Others Respect begins with how you honour your emotions, which is informed by the work that comes from developing self-awareness when we have self-awareness, we have our core purpose and motivation.
Respect finishes with empathy in how we listen, respect and honour others and life them up with us on the organizational journey-and their life’s journey
One of the first things leaders must learn is, you must build a powerful values structure that becomes your compass for how you: 
C-Communicate
O-Create Opportunities
R-Build Relationships
D-Make Decisions

One of the most coveted and prized respect is what unifies belief and trust and builds powerful impact for ourselves and others.
How are you leading with RESPECT as a Leader?
The two keys in this respect for self and respect for your team. Team is the key word- we are all in this together. Do I sometimes have to help you motivate yourself ? yes. Do we correct eachother politely? Yes we do and we are a better team because of that mutual respect. To develop into one of the greats of leadership and to become a better person. It’s imperative to practice humility.

According to unbriddling your brilliance, at the heart of humility is a desire to serve and a dedication to helping others become great. Never confuse humility with weakness; as a matter of fact, it takes great strength of will and character to put the needs of others before your own. To admit your mistakes, to be vulnerable, transparent and fallible in front of your own team. Humble leaders recognize that they are not on earth to see how important they can become but to see how much difference they can make in the lives of others.
Compassion goes beyond sympathy and Empathy connect with Empathy but lead with compassion. As a leader, how are you leading, with Sympathy, Empathy or with compassion? The words, “Empathy” and “Compassion” as well as “sympathy” are
sometimes used interchangeably. They represent, positive, altruistic traits,
but they don’t refer to the exact same experience. 

Compassion Goes Beyond Sympathy and Empathy










The Graph shows understanding of the other’s experience vs willingness to act to support at different emotions of pity, sympathy, empathy and compassion. It is helpful to consider the two distinct qualities of compassion; understanding what another is feeling, and the willingness to act to alleviate suffering for another. The above image usually distinguishes compassion from the similar experiences of empathy, sympathy and pity.
At the bottom, we have pity
Pity: when we experience pity, we have little willingness to act and little understanding of another’s experience. We simply feel sorry for them.
Moving up the chart to Empathy: with empathy, we have a close, visceral understanding of the other person’s experience. We feel with the person, we literally take on the emotions of the other person those feelings our own. Though a noble thing to do, it does not necessarily help the other person, except for possibly makingthem feel less lonely in their experience. Finally at the top right, we have a good understanding of what the other person is experiencing and a willingness to act. Our understanding of the other person’s experience is greater than with empathy because we pull on our emotional awareness as well as rational understanding.
Compassion occurs when we take a step away from empathy and ask ourselves what we can do to support the person who is suffering. In this way, compassion is an intention versus an emotion.

Why Does This Matter?
Paul Polman, former CEO of unilever, puts it this way. “if I led with empathy I would never be able to make a single decision. Why? Because with empathy, I mirror the emotions of others, which make it possible to consider the greater good” Paul is right. Even with its many benefits empathy can be a poor guide for leaders empathy often helps us to do what’s right, but it also sometimes motivates us to do what’s wrong. Research by Paul Bloom, professor of cognitive science and psychology at Yale University and Author of Against Empathy, discovered that empathy can distort our judgement. In his study, two groups of people listened to the recording of a terminally ill boy describing his pain. One group was asked to identify with, and feel for the boy. The other group was instructed to listen objectively and not engage emotionally. After listening to the recording each person was asked whether they would move the boy up a prioritize treatment list managed by medical doctors. In the emotional group, three-quarters of participants decided to move him up the list against the opinion of medical professionals, potentially putting sicker individuals at
risk. In the objective group, only one third of the participants made the
same recommendation.

As leaders, empathy may cloud our judgement, encourage bias, and make us less effective at making wise decisions. However, it should not be completely avoided. A leader without a spark plug- it simply won’t engage. Empathy is essential for connection and then we can leverage the spark to lead with compassion. And herein lies the challenge for most leaders; we tend to get trapped by our empathy, making us unable to shift to compassion.

Avoiding the empathy Trap- and leading with compassion. Overcoming an empathetic hijack is a critical skill for any leader. In mastering this skill, you must remember that shifting away from empathy does not make you less human or less kind. Rather, it makes you better able to support people during times. Here are six key strategies for using empathy as a catalyst for leading with more compassion.
Take a mental and emotional stepaway. To avoid getting caught in an empathetic hijack when you are with someone who is suffering try to take a mental and emotional space to get a clearer perspective of the situation and the person. Only with this perspective will you be able to help. By creating this emotional distance, you may feel like you are being unkind. But remember you are not stepping away from the problem so you can help solve it.

Ask what they need. When you ask the simple question “what do you need” you have initiated a solution to the issue by giving the person an opportunity to reflect on what may be needed. This will better inform you about how you can help. And for the suffering person, the first step toward being helped is to feel heard and seen.

Remember the power of Non-Action leaders are generally good at getting stuff done. But when it comes to people having challenges, it is important to remember that in many instances people do not need your solutions; they need your ear and your caring presence. Many problems just need to be heard and acknowledged. In this way, taking “non-action” can often be the most powerful means of helping. Coach the person so they can find their own solution. Leadership is not about solving problems for people. It is about growing and developing people, so they are empowered to solve their own problems Avoid taking this life-learning opportunity away from people by straight-up solving their issues. Instead, coach them and mentor them. Show them a pathway to finding their own answers.

Practice self care. Show self-compassion by practicing authentic self-care. There is a cost to managing one’s own feelings to better manage others. Often called emotional labour, the task of absorbing reflecting and redirecting the feelings of other people can be overwhelming. Because of this, we as leaders must practice self-care: take breaks, sleep and eat well. Cultivate meaningful relationships and practice mindfulness. We need to find ways of staying resilient, grounded and in tune with ourselves. When we show up in the workplace with these qualities, people can lean on us and find solace and comfort in our well being. The best part about life? Every morning you have a new opportunity to become a happier version of yourself and it is imperative to be with those who will bring out the best in you, not the stress in you.
Emotional Intelligence and Servant Leadership Servant leadership and Emotional Intelligence go hand-in-hand,and they show us how to build the culture of our organization: here’s how

Self Awareness and empathy, which form the cornerstones of an emotional intelligent.culture, are at the core of servant leadership. Knowing yourself and understanding your why enables you to give the gifts of self-awareness and empathy to others. Empathy begins with listening, caring and becomes a culture builder that empowers others to share their stones, share ideas and concepts and lift one
another up in all conversation.

Foresight comes from innovative thinking born from an environment where people feel safe and empowered to share ideas connect with one another and continue to get better. Commitment, one of the most important organizational values, only forms when people know themselves, are willing to understand one another, and have a genuine desire and curiosity to help others.
 You →why→others
Servant leadership is about serving others, but we have to always remember in order to be our best selves and to serve others with a servant’s heart, we must first know ourselves and understand our why. What organization have you seen put servant leadership in action? And how can you as a leader begin to influence others by using servant leadership and emotional intelligence? 

No one can be great leader unless they genuinely care about their team’s success.
The ultimately measure of a leader is their ability to help every member of their team become successful. But, it’s not about your team helping become successful; it’s about a selfless devotion to the people who work their butts off to help the organization achieve its suppose and goals. 

Your focus should be on developing your team, helping them succeed, and watching them grow into the people they want to become. When your people are successful, it is a reflection of you as a Leader. According to Amy Modglin, when we learn to turn our focus from ourselves to others, the whole world opens up to us. When you understand this and take the focus away from you, it will change who you are as a leader. Being a leader is not about you. It’s about the people that are on your team and how you can help them be successful. 

Leaders are the ones who have the courage to go first, to put themselves at personal risk to open a path for others to follow. We call them leaders because they go first, because they take risk before anybody else does, because they will choose to sacrifice so their people will be safe and protected. Leaders who understand that leading others is a privilege also know that no one is an expert in everything. Instead, the most influential businesses are built by a team of people committed to helping the organization achieve its vision and purpose.

According to Brian Scudamore, who said he have learned that strong leaders don’t fight to have the first and last word. Instead, they listen to their teams, as the right questions, and give everyone the chance to contribute. Why do so many leaders seem to forget that leading others more than anything else should be held in reverence? You are privileged to be in a position where you can direct, shape and focus the potential of people to a specific result. 

Remember, leadership is all about people, inspiring people to believe that the impossible is possible, developing and building people to perform at heights they never imagine, and it’s all about inspiring your team to become the very best version of themselves. When you understand that, your company will become one of the best in the world. Great leaders are not the best at different things and get them all on the same team. If you’re the kind of leader who finally becomes a CEO or whatever your dream Job is and you stop craving knowledge. You’ll hinder prioritize learning because they prioritize growing. Learn about your market, learn about your employees, learn about different industries because these variables are continuously changing. If you want to be an incredible leader in your industry, learning is where you should start. The ability to learn is the most important quality a leader can have.
What do you feel matters most when building relationships in business? The building blocks of Emotional Intelligence are what lead to great relationships. Here’s how you improve your relationship management:
Leadership is influence- it’s your ability to communicate effectively, forge partnerships to drive results and the ability to lift others up and built camaderie to have a great team and culture. 

The Building Blocks of Emotional Intelligence 
SELF AWARENESS	SELF MANAGEMENT	SOCIAL AWARENESS	RELATIONSHIP MANAGEMENT
Emotional Awareness	Self Control
Trustworthiness	Empathy	Influence 
Conflict management
Self Confidence	Conscientiousness
Adaptability

Innovation	Organization Awareness	Team work 
Leadership 
Communication 
Adapted from Daniel Goleman and Richard E. Boyatzis HBR by Christopher D. Connor’s  The Building Blocks of Emotional Intelligence

This starts with self awareness, empowered by self-confidence, values and progresses towards empathy and a conscious decision to help others succeed.
That servant leadership mindset, comes from a rock-solid foundation of knowing yourself and understanding how you can positively impact others.
How can leaders become better communicators? This always begins with listening and is followed by empathy. Understand that people need to be heard- and we need their input to drive execution and results.

It’s critical that we use positive language, that we’re authentic and focused on results and resolving conflict when it arises. It’s why I cite optimism as one of the most important qualities of an Emotional Intelligence Leader. An optimistic leader sees solutions where other see problems. An optimistic leader works TOGETHER with people, not apart. An optimistic leader dosen’t just talk about success, they follow it up with plan. Any great leadership plan involves the savvy and know how of influencing others and building relationships. 

What would you add as important when building relationships as leaders?

EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE AND  LEADERSHIP 
How will you know what Emotional Intelligence look like in action? The answer according to Christopher D. Connos, with some specific ways can use this everyday ie by exhibiting these 10 qualities, you are truly an emotional intelligence leader;

1	A desire to help others and to want to succeed for yourself requires self-	awareness and commitment. This means understanding your strengths and 	committing to improving each day.
2	Adaptability is one of the cornerstone piece of emotional intelligence, and 	requires a self-awareness and willingness to change by recognizing what you 	need. Understand what’s working, understand what’s not. Act accordingly 
3	Optimism- a positive outlook and belief that things will work out in your f	avour. This is how you build an emotionally intelligent mindset. See the 	positive and see the wins both today and going forward.
4	Passion: Every great achievement and endeavour begins with motivation, drive, 	positive energy hope and enthusiasm. Build your leadership foundation on 	passion and purpose.
5	Needs and wants- By gaining a keen self-awareness to understand what you 	need versus what you want, you will avoid many disappointments and have 	greater clarity at purpose 
6	Belief- Faith is core value that starts everything. Keep believing-have faith that 	you will do great things.
7	Analytical Mind- The ability to discern,evaluate, analyse and determine what 	is best is what separates great leaders. Get very clear on your priorities, how 	you make decisions and identify opportunities.
8	Curiosity: this fuels a desire to learn, grow get better and continue furthering y	ourself both personally and professionally. Choose one new things to learn 	today that will make you better 
9	Empathy: One of the absolute most important qualities of an emotionally 	intelligent leader. This requires listening, giving of yourself, caring and a 	unique desire to build relationships 
10	Self awareness: The core foundation of Emotional Intelligence by recognizing 	who you are, what you want and why you want to do things, you gain clarity 	to set goals and positive influence.

What makes you effective as a leader is not the title you hold. Instead, it’s demonstrating an unrelenting focus on helping others succeed in their collective efforts. Many believe leadership is conferred along with a title or attained when you direct a team of people, but true leadership is never about authority or power, according to Lolly Daskal. Instead it’s about helping others grow, which anyone can do.

If you can inspire people to believe something beyond what they thought was possible, believe in someone when they didn’t believe in themselves, when you show people you care, you’re already a leader. We don’t need to lead. We just need to care. People would rather follow a leader with a heart than a leader with a title.
What do habits do for us? Habits lead to efficiency and routine which lead to big time business results. The coaching style of Emotional Intelligent leadership shows you how to set habits to achieve results. Great leaders set expectations and explain the purpose behind why they’re doing what they’re doing. This leads to everyone being on the same page.

Coaching style leaders are inquisitive they ask questions, are always seeking to learn and as a result have highly-engaged teams who feel well supported. It’s so important to give your team autonomy to be involved in key decisions and conversations. Studies have shown how important a feeling of ownership is to employees.
Accountability is essential to holding to a high standard of performance for execution that ensures results are met, which can only be done by measuring and evaluating actions.

Recognition and genuine, heartfelt appreciation and gratitude to your people is what builds camaraderie and truly great teams. 
The five coaching Habits of excellent leaders.
Habit					Result
1.EXPLAIN			Alignment
2.ASK				Engagement 
3.INVOLVE			Ownership 
4.MEASURE			Accountability 
5.APRECIATE			Commitment 
As a leader, you should never be too busy to listen because it’s the ultimate form of respect anyone can give to another human being. Speak in such a way that others love to listen to you and listen in such a way that others love to speak to you. Stop being afraid of what could go wrong and start being excited of what could go right. People with purpose, goals and visions have no time for drama, they invest their energy in creativity and focus on living a positive life. 

You may be going through challenge right now; it may be difficult, and it may appear insurmountable, but remember that every season has a purpose. Challenge yourself to control how you respond to what is happening, that’s where your power is and always remember that we don’t grow when things are easy; we grow when we face challenges.

Personal development doesn't always have to come in form of coaching, mentor ship or formal training. While these methods of learning are valuable, not having them shouldn't stop us from improving. Especially when it involves our cognitive skills, or how we think, reason and remember things.
The beauty of developing these skills is that it can be done “on the Job” you can live in a working laboratory that allows you to experiment within areas where you may or may not have strong competency 
These are eight simple ways to think better 

1	When we admit that we can always learn, grow and improve more, we think 	right. Leveraging what we do know (our strengths) and working to minimize 	what we don’t (our weakness) makes us continually aware of the need to be 	open, curious and willing to do some work to find things out.
2	Goal setting is an underappreciated skill, as little gets done that isn’t written 	down and clearly stated. If you’ve never set goals, you are likely 	underachieving. Start with personal goals and then talk with your manager 	about collaborating on a goal or two that help you develop your skills.
3	Thinking and preparing for what happens at work is necessary. Most of us 	sleepwalk through our day, relying upon what we already know to be arduous 	and time-consuming make notes, think about what you want to say in the 	meeting, or what you want to accomplish with with the team. Preparation is 	being ready for what does.
4	Never fear feedback: think  of it as a gift, and be thankful tor those who 	provide it. We all need it, and just because you received it doesn't mean you 	have to consider and use it. You should weigh all feedback and decide what to 	do from there.
5	Monitoring,  measuring and tracking progress will make you smarter and a 	better manager or leader. When you create the conditions that tell you how you 	are performing “in the moment” you have the ability to make changes, adjust, 	or know that your actions are on the right path 
6	Always ask others for their input. On anything. How you are performing, big 	decisions that need to be made or seeking out wisdom and experience from 	others. This will minimize what could go wrong or poorly when you make 	decisions alone with little information.
7	Keep a diary or Journal. Nothing will clarify your thoughts and actions more 	than writing them down and receiving them consistently. This becomes a 	superpower when you practice it and continually think about your actions and 	why you took them.
8	Asking good questions is  key to everything. Questioning is a skill that 	engages people and makes everyone think about what they’re doing and why 	they’re doing it. It tells others that you care about what they think and their 	perspective has value to any process. Anyone can take these steps to a brighter 	future.

8 ways to develop Meta cognitive skills 
See phone for Diagram 






Transactional Vs Transformational Leadership
What does it feel like to work for a transactional leader? In short, tiring and controlling. Transformational leaders values their employees and priotize developing their people and putting them first. When the pace gets fast and when deadlines are tight, spme people throw all of the wonderful virtues of transformational leadership right out of the window.
In adversity and challenging times  - when  transformational Leadership is needed most - we see what defines really great leaders:
-	Character
-	commitment
-	A long-term dedication to supporting their people
-	A focus on  lifting others upnand investing their career development
-	Empathy
-	A willingness toi put others needs before your own wants the pace of work and the speed of business isn’t  showing down. Reaserch shows technology isnonly increasing the pace of expectations from each employee.
If you’re going to ask a lot from yolur people, you must begin first with letting them know you care about them and that you’re going to support them all throughout their career. This begins with an emotionally intelligent approach to leadership that’s spearhead by empathy and a willingness to go “all in” for a transformational relationship that will yield benefits for all.
what do you see as the traits of a transformational leader?

categories	Transactional	Transformational
leader’s source of power	Rank, position	character, Complaince
Follower reaction	compliance	commitment
Time  frame	short-term	Long-term
Rewards	Pay, Promotion, etc	Pride, self-esteem, etc
supervision	Important	Less important
counselling focus	Evaluation	Development
where change occurs	follower behaviour	follower attitude, value
where “leadership” found	Leader’s behaviour	Follower’s heart

success always comes back to your willingness to put in the work. So i ask, what are you willing to do to get to where you want to be?
Putting in the work means preparation. which means planning. The preparation builds confidence, which fuels productivity and leads to success..
As you reflect this weekend, think about what you want to do and begin to put together samll steps that will that will help you get there.
This can take you 10 minutes to begin, success and possitivity begin in the mind. This begins with thought creation, then commitment (verbal or written) and then taking action and following through.

The true joy of any process is the doing part. Success comes when you improve your skills and continue forward with discipline, consistency repetition, and a positive mindset.
Begin the work by getting to know yourself better (self-awareness) by understanding your straight and desires.
Get clear on your purpose and what drives you most (motivation)
Start small and you’ll be adding big games before you know it the most successful people speak positive words and goals over their lives to feed their subconscious  mind and then visualize their success.

A big part of my “why” for coaching and speaking on emotional Intelligence is because it’s truly an equal opportunity skill set to master. Everyone of us can get better each day at the core  skills! This means: We can all become more self-aware by understanding our natural talents and strenghts, and seeking feedback on ways to get better.
We all can adapt to change, whether that’s moving on from a difficult conversation or changing course on a project task where our first attempt did not succeed. The nuance is understanding the difference. 
We can become better listeners, while developing genuine care, concern and curiosity to help someone else.
we all can take the time to recognise someone else’s accomplishment, effort or contributions. Be kind. Offer praise and respect.
We all can seek to build one new relationship each week in an effort to lift someone else up and create a new opportunity. when you understand that this is a gradual process, yet one you’re able to do and that will lead to incredible rewards, you’re truly given the gift of optimism and hope to put in the work to get better for yourself-and others. what are you doing today to use Emnotional Intelligence to help yourself and others? 

one of the most difficult lessons many leaders learn is the necessity to welcome and tolerate disagreement. when you’re in a leadership position, it can be difficult to hear others suggest that your ideas or opinion may be wrong.
weak leaders take disagreement personally. They feel threatened, offended and attacked when their team challenges their ideas and opinions. They react by waving off disagreement as unimportant, and at worse, they remove those who disagree with them. This ultimately leads to a team of individuals who feel under valued and uninspired.

Great leaders not only welcome and tolerate disagreement, they make it a point to surround themselves with individuals who feel comfortable providing critism and alternate perspectives. They seek individuals to be in their inner circle who will challenge and question their decisions, ideas, and initiatives Embrace diversity of thought because having diverse people and views on your team helps leaders make better decisions.

Great leaders make it clear that they welcome challenges, critism, and view points other than their own. They know that an environment where people are afraid to speak up, offer insight and ask good questions is destined for failure.
What are you doing to grow your skill set Emotional Intelligence? Emotional Intelligence is about the knowledge and management of how you influence others. You need both to succeed as a leader. The foundatioin of Emotional Intelligence is values. Values are a set of guiding principles and ideas that provide a standard for the way we behave and make decisions.

These values guide our self awareness and impact the way we communicate. when we hold ourselves to a high standard, we’re focused on self-improvement and lifting others up. when we lift others up, it opens up the doors for better team performance, increased motivation and building the camaradene of the team we lead. This all begins with connection-connecting with yourself to understand and build self-awareness and self-confidence and connecting with others to show empathy, develop and support your people. The best part is, Emotional Intelligence is a skill set all of us can improve and get better at each day.
what stands out most to you as areas you’d like to improve in this chart of Emotional Intelligence?



		
Personal Competence			Relational Competence

Knowledge










Management






Every room, wherever you go, is full of advice, wisdom and knowledge. All of it is available to anyone with a desire to lead. All of which can be helpful; still, the wisdom we must ask for is..... do I have what it takes to lead? Do I have the heart of a leader?
You may think in your head that leadership is something that you want to pursue,  or may be you already know that you will be a leader, believing it’s your calling  or destiny. Still, if you fail to recognise one importnt aspect of leasership at any time, it may never happen for you.

A higher level tittle, more salary, bigger office, company car, or other job perks will never make you a leader. If you don’t understand this one fact, when you become a leader, it is NO LONGER ABOUT YOU.

You’ve moved away from being that individual contributor and have to prove yourself on a different level. It’s now about taking responsibility for others, those who will be in your charge, and taking care of your responsiblities. Consider it double-duty for the same pay.
Being responsible for others means taking on what they do well and not so well, and you see their mistakes, successes, short-comings, and greatest accomplishments. You now own it all.
Your new role as a leader is “ to inspire, empower, and serve others to elevate them to be their best over an extended period of time. This means that while they are in your charge, you help them to be become their best, not yours.
Leadership is about caring, supporting and helping others, focusing on what’s best for the people on your team. It’s about their growth and developement and what you can accomplish together, not what you think they can do for you.
Yes, there are many mistakes that a new leader can make, and trust me when I say those mistakes will happen. still, there may be no bigger mistake than failing to recognise what it takes to succeed as a leader.
Are you ready for a leadership position? Evaluate your leadership skills on these four measures:

Operate with 10,000 feet view
*	While a manager operates with a 10-1,000 feet view of the problem and is 		involved in day-to-day excution of tasks, a leader operates with a 10,000 feet 	view of their organisation.
*	They may not be directly involved in solving problems, but they influence the 	problems being solved.
*	They have the ability to make decisions  without all the information.
*	It’s their confident humity-confidence in their knowledge and their humility to 	ask the right questions that enables them to make the right decisions.

Lead with a future orientation.
*	While a manager is tasked with executing the plan, it’s the leader who sets the 	direction on these plans.
*	They look beyond the bounds of the organisation to address the needs of 		tomorrow, identifying what must be done next with the promise of a better 	future.
*	They think about effectiveness first, why something is being done before 	worrying about it’s efficiency, how to make it better. They understand that 	doing the right thing is more improtant than doing it right.

Contribute to a cohesive culture.
*	People look up to leaders not only for setting the direction but also shaping the 	culture. They convey a message not only in their words, but also through their 	body language.
*	They use mistakes as a learning opportunity to get better. They openly talk 	about their mistakes to others sharing valuable stories and other learnings in 	effect conveying that mistakes and failures are an essential part of success.
*	They thrive on disagreements because it gives them the information they need 	to test their ideas before putting them into implementation.
*	They make decisions that seem right even if they are unpopular at first.

Act as a multiplier
*	They operate as a genuis maker - leaders who grow people’s intelligence by 	engaging with it.
*	They do not try to be the center of attention or worry about how smart they 	look. Rather, they extract the smarts and maximum intelligence from each of 	their team members.
*	They speak less in meetings and give space to their people by empowering 		them to figure out an answer on their own.
*	They bring out the intelligence in other and create collective, viral intelligence 	in their organization.

How to get Along with Diffult Colleagues
It’s easy to get caught up in interpersonal conflict at work or in any association. But these negative dynamics can lead to mistakes, reduced creativity and worse decision-making. Here are four ways according to Havard Business Review to work more effectively with difficult colleagues;
*	Understand that your perspective is limited. It’s not realistic to expect everyone to agree with you all the time. When differences are, ask yourself questions like: what if I am wrong? How would I change my behaviour? What assumptions have I made?
*	View the conflict as a problem to be solved together.
Understand what outcome you are aiming for. Do you want to get a project over the finished line? Build a healthy working relationship that will last into the future/ feel less angry or frustrated after your interactions? Decide on your goals before interacting with your colleagues and keep your eyes in the prize.
*	Avoid Venting and Gossip
	Choose who you talk to (and what you share) carefully. Look for people who are constructive, have your best interests at heart, will challenge your perspective when they disagree, and can be discreet.
*	Experiment to find whaat worsk:
Start by coming up with two or three methods you want to test out. For example, if you want improve communications with a grumpy colleagues, decide that for two weeks you are going to ignore their tone and focus on the substance of their messaage; often small actions can have a big impact. Everyone make mistakes in life, but that doesn’t mean they have to pay for them the rest of their life. Sometimes good people make bad choices it doesn’t mean they are bad it means they are human. We all are human, we all make mistakes. Mistakes are not wrong, they are here to teach us something and helping us to transform. They judgment and criticism of our mind is, what keeps us stuck from the progress with less judgement and criticism (ie using the constructive critic) towards others we will start to be even less selt-critical and judgemental and with this, we could grow up into the best version of ourself.
